Rules Compendium: Introduction The book you hold in your hands is the definitive guide for  RULES BASICS The D&D rules have some essential assumptions.  ADJUDICATION Essential to the D&D game is the Dungeon Master (DM). The DM is the referee and storyteller for the game, as well as the judge when the rules don’t cover a particular topic. Let’s face it: No set of rules can cover every possible circumstance in a game meant to mimic life in a fantasy world. The rules clear up as much as possible, assuming the DM can make a judgment in a situation that the rules don’t cover or that they don’t cover adequately. DMs are expected to use knowledge of existing rules, common sense, realworld knowledge, and a sense of fun when dealing with such special cases. Knowledge of the existing rules is key, because the rules often do cover similar cases or combine to make such judgment calls unnecessary. It’s not always true, but you often can do or at least try something the rules fail to directly forbid, as long as the DM thinks doing so is reasonable. For example, the rules don’t come out and say that a Medium creature threatens all squares within 10 feet while wielding a reach weapon and wearing spiked gauntlets. However, it’s appropriate to assume the creature does just that. The DM is also there to keep the game moving. Doing so might require expedient rulings that later prove troublesome or just plain incorrect. That’s okay. Players and DMs make mistakes, and these mistakes tend to average out over time. It’s better for everyone’s fun if the game just keeps going rather than devolving into a rules argument or going back to revisit the round in which a mistake was made.  Whenever your character attempts an act that has some chance of failure, you do this: • Roll a d20. • Add any relevant modifiers. • Compare the result to a target number known as a Difficulty Class (DC). If the result equals or exceeds the DC, your character succeeds and garners the benefit of so doing. If the result is lower than the DC, your character fails and suffers the consequences of failure.  MATH When doing math in D&D, some conventions are in effect unless a specific rule or description says otherwise.  INTRODUCTION  how to play the 3.5 revision of the DUNGEONS & DRAGONS Roleplaying Game. Years in the making, it gathers resources from a wide variety of supplements, rules errata, and rules clarifications to provide an authoritative guide for playing the D&D game. It updates and elucidates the rules, as well as expanding on them in ways that make it more fun and easier to play. When a preexisting core book or supplement differs with the rules herein, Rules Compendium is meant to take precedence. If you have a question on how to play D&D at the table, this book is meant to answer that question. Rules Compendium isn’t just a compilation of the rules you need to play D&D. It’s also a celebration of the 3rd Edition of the world’s most popular roleplaying game. Those who’ve worked on the game in past years have taken the time to comment on the rules and share experiences with you in these pages. You’ll find anecdotes, house rules, history, and more in these asides and essays. If the rules in this book don’t show you anything new, the designers, developers, and editors who commented here just might.  CORE MECHANIC  Rounding Fractions If you wind up with a fraction, round down, even if the fraction is one-half or larger. As detailed elsewhere in this book, certain rolls, such as damage and hit points, have a minimum of 1.  Multiplying Sometimes a special rule makes you multiply a number or a die roll. When two or more multipliers apply to any abstract value such as die roll modifiers, combine them into a single multiple, with each extra multiple adding 1 less than its value to the fi rst multiple. Thus, a double (×2) and a double (×2) applied to the same number results in a triple (×3, because 2 + 1 = 3). Three doubles results in a quadruple (×4 because 2 + 1 + 1 = 4). When applying multipliers to what are considered real-world values (such as weight or distance), the normal rules of math apply instead.  ORDER OF RULES APPLICATION The D&D game assumes a specific order of rules application: General to specific to exception. A general rule is a basic guideline, but a more specific rule takes precedence when applied to the same activity. For instance, a monster description is more specific than any general rule about monsters, so the description takes precedence. An exception is a particular kind of specific rule that contradicts or breaks another rule (general or specific). The Improved Disarm feat, for instance, provides an exception to the rule that an attacker provokes an attack of opportunity from the defender he’s trying to disarm (see Disarm, page 45).  TIME Time works for characters in the imaginary world of D&D like it does in the real world. Minutes, hours, days, and months can pass as the characters explore and grow in power. Only during certain situations is the measure of time more precise. Then the round is used.  Round Combat is played in rounds. Each round represents 6 seconds in the game world, regardless of how long it takes to play out the round. A minute contains 10 rounds. See Initiative, page 70, for more on beginning combat.  5  Ability Score Loss  ABILITY SCORE LOSS  Some attacks deal damage to an ability score in the form of ability damage or ability drain. Ability damage must be healed naturally or magically, and ability drain must be restored by magic. A few effects impose an effective ability score reduction, which is different from ability score loss. Any such reduction disappears at the end of the effect’s duration, and the ability score immediately returns to its former value. The capacity that some creatures have to damage or drain ability scores is a supernatural one, requiring some sort of attack. Such creatures don’t damage or drain passively, such as when enemies strike them, even if an enemy attacks using unarmed attacks or natural weapons.  ABILITY DAMAGE When an attack damages an ability score, it temporarily reduces that score in a living creature (any creature not of the construct, deathless, or undead type). If a creature can damage an ability score, that creature’s descriptive text describes how it does so and which ability is damaged, as well as the amount of that damage. On a critical hit, an attack that deals ability damage deals twice the indicated amount of damage—if the damage is expressed as a die range, roll twice as many dice.  Illus. by L. Parrillo  HEALING ABILITY DAMAGE If, during a 24-hour period, a creature gets a full 8 hours of sleep or equivalent rest (depending on the creature’s race), that creature recovers 1 ability score point per damaged ability score. Any significant interruption, such as combat, during the rest prevents healing. Complete bed rest for the entire 24 hours doubles this rate. Undertaking even light activity during a 24-hour period prevents this additional healing.  Long-Term Care Someone who has the Heal skill can help another creature double its recovery of ability score points by succeeding on a DC 15 Heal check. A healer can tend up to six patients. Providing this sort of care is light activity and requires medical supplies. You can’t give longterm care to yourself.  ABILITY DRAIN  6  When an attack drains an ability score, it permanently reduces that score in a living creature (any creature not of the construct, deathless, or undead type). If a creature can drain an ability score, that creature’s descriptive text describes how it does so and which ability is drained, as well as the amount of that drain. On a critical hit, an attack that causes ability drain deals twice the indicated amount of drain—if the drain is expressed as a die range, roll twice as many dice. Unless otherwise noted in the creature’s description, a creature gains 5 temporary hit points (10 on a critical hit) whenever it  drains an ability score, no matter how many points it drains. Temporary hit points gained in this fashion last for up to 1 hour. (See Temporary Hit Points, page 72.) Some ability drain attacks allow a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 draining creature’s racial HD + draining creature’s Cha modifier; the exact DC is given in the creature’s descriptive text). If no saving throw is mentioned, none is allowed. A restoration spell can restore drained ability score points.  LOSING ALL POINTS Keeping track of negative ability score points is never necessary. A creature’s ability score can’t drop below 0. While any loss is debilitating, losing all points in an ability score can be devastating. • Strength 0 means that a creature can’t move at all. It lies helpless on the ground. • Dexterity 0 means that a creature can’t move at all. It stands motionless, rigid, and helpless. • Constitution 0 means that a creature is dead. • Intelligence 0 means that a creature can’t think and is unconscious in a comalike stupor, helpless. • Wisdom 0 means that a creature is lapsed into a deep sleep filled with nightmares, helpless. • Charisma 0 means that a creature is lapsed into a catatonic, comalike stupor, helpless. Having a score of 0 in an ability is different from having no ability score whatsoever. A creature that has no score in a certain ability treats that attribute as a nonability (see page 105).  Action Types  STANDARD ACTION A standard action allows you to perform an act that takes a substantial amount of time. The most common type of standard action is a single melee or ranged attack. Other common standard actions include casting a spell, concentrating to maintain an active spell, activating a magic item, and using a special ability.  MOVE ACTION A move action allows you to move your speed or perform an action that takes a similar amount of time. You can move your speed, climb one-quarter of your speed, draw or stow a weapon or other item, stand up, pick up an object, or perform some equivalent action. You can take a move action in place of a standard action. For instance, rather than moving your speed and attacking, you could stand up and move your speed (two move actions), put away a weapon and climb one-quarter of your speed (two move actions), or pick up an item and stow it in your backpack (two move actions). If you move no actual distance in a round—commonly because you have swapped your move for one or more equivalent actions, such as standing up—you can usually take one 5-foot step before, during, or after the other actions you’re taking.  FULL-ROUND ACTION A full-round action consumes almost all your effort during a round. Before, during, or after a full-round action in which  you don’t otherwise move, you can usually take a 5-foot step. The most common type of full-round action is a full attack, which allows you to make multiple melee or ranged attacks in a single round. Some full-round actions don’t allow you to take a 5-foot step. Other full-round actions can be taken as standard actions in situations when you’re limited to performing only a standard action during your turn, such as during a surprise round.  FREE ACTION Free actions consume a very small amount of time and effort. Their impact is so minor that they’re considered free. You can perform one or more free actions during your turn. However, the DM can put reasonable limits on what you can really do for free.  ACTION TYPES  During a normal round, you can perform a standard action and a move action, or you can perform a full-round action. You can also perform an immediate action or a swift action, and as many free actions as your DM allows. You can always take a move action in place of a standard action. Activities can also be undertaken that are parts of other actions but not actions in and of themselves. In some situations, such as during a surprise round, your activity, and thereby your actions, might be restricted. Free, full-round, immediate, move, standard, and swift are action types. An action’s type tells you how long the action takes to perform within the framework of the combat round. It also tells you how movement is treated. See Movement, page 90, for more on movement. The Actions in Combat table, page 8, details many possible actions and their parameters.  SWIFT ACTION A swift action consumes a very small amount of time, but it represents a larger expenditure of effort than a free action. You can take a swift action any time during your turn, but you can perform only one swift action per turn.  IMMEDIATE ACTION An immediate action consumes a tiny amount of time. However, unlike a swift action, an immediate action can be performed at any time during a round, even when it isn’t your turn. Using an immediate action on your turn counts as your swift action for that turn. If you use an immediate action when it isn’t your turn, you can’t use another immediate action or a swift action until after your next turn. You can’t use an immediate action when you’re flat-footed.  NOT AN ACTION Some activities are so minor that they aren’t even considered free actions. They literally don’t take any time at all to do and are considered an inherent part of doing something else.  RESTRICTED ACTIVITY A few situations make you unable to take a full round’s worth of actions. In such cases, you’re allowed to take only a single standard action or a single move action, along with allowed swift, immediate, and free actions. You can’t take a full-round action and finish that action, but you can start or complete a full-round action by using a standard action.     BIRTH OF NEW “FREE” ACTIONS Halfway into 3rd Edition, while designing Miniatures Handbook, we realized that free actions hid a potential smorgasbord of cool new mechanics. We subdivided the free actions into immediate actions (a free action you can take when it isn’t your turn), and swift actions (a free action you can take when it’s your turn).  However, it wasn’t until Expanded Psionics Handbook’s development that the bulb fully brightened. The concept that swift and immediate actions could serve as one more resource available to a player opened up new vistas of possibility, expanding options in the game. —Bruce R. Cordell, designer     7  Actions in Combat The following table summarizes acts that can be undertaken  ACTIONS IN COMBAT  during combat. It also shows the action type required and whether an activity provokes attacks of opportunity (AoO). The page of this book where a related entry contains further details is also noted. If no page is indicated, the act is defined in the notes following the table or is self-explanatory.  Actions in Combat Standard Action AoO1 Page Activate magic item Command2 No 84 Manipulation3 Yes 84 Apply oil Yes 84 Drink potion Yes 84 Mental2 No 84 Scroll2 Yes 87 Spell trigger (such as a wand or staff)2 No 85 Aid another in combat4 Maybe 10 Assess opponent (Sense Motive) No 68 Attack (melee) No 16 Attack (ranged) Yes 16 Attack (unarmed) Yes* 16 Bull rush5 Yes 23 Cast spell (1 standard action casting time) Yes 133 Cast touch spell (1 standard action casting time) and touch one target Yes 126 Concentrate to maintain active spell No 132 Demoralize opponent (Intimidate) No 68 Dismiss spell No 127 Draw hidden weapon No 117 Escape grapple or pin (Escape Artist) No 61 Feint No 54 Free another from fascinated condition No 35 Light torch with tindertwig Yes — Lower spell resistance No 130 Make dying friend stable (DC 15 Heal check) Yes 73 Move grapple6 Yes 61 Overrun5, 7 Yes 108 Ready (triggers standard action) No 110 Start or complete full-round action8 Maybe — Throw grappling hook (Use Rope) Yes 50 Total defense No 55 Turning check No 146 Use spell-like ability9 Yes 118 Use supernatural ability9 No 119 Use whip Yes — Move Action Control nonwar mount (DC 20 Ride check) Crawl 5 feet10 Direct or redirect active spell Draw light weapon while grappling11 Draw weapon12 Hide after sniping Load hand crossbow, light crossbow, or sling13 Make active Listen check or Spot check Mount or dismount Move14 Note the direction of scent Open or close door Pick up item Push or pull heavy object Ready or loose shield15 Retrieve stored item  8  AoO1 Yes Yes No No No No Yes No No Yes No No Yes Yes No Yes  Page 88 91 134 61 — 92 — 114 88 90 115 — — 47 — —  Move Action Sheathe weapon Spur mount Stand from prone Switch hands with an item  AoO1 Yes No Yes No  Full-Round Action Activate magic item Administer potion to unconscious creature Apply oil to unconscious creature Cast metamagic spell spontaneously Cast spell (1 round casting time)16 Cast touch spell (1 standard action casting time) and touch two to six allies Charge17 Control nonwar mount (on failed DC 20 Ride check) Coup de grace Escape from net or entangling spell (DC 20 Escape Artist check) Extinguish flames Full attack Light torch Load heavy crossbow bolt or repeating crossbow bolt case18 Lock or unlock weapon in locked gauntlet19 Open lock Plug ears with soundproof material Prepare oil with fuse20 Retrieve spell component while grappling21 Run Search 5 cubic feet Secure grappling hook (DC 10 Use Rope check) Trample Withdraw17  AoO1 Page  Page — 89 35 —  Yes Yes Yes Yes  84 84 139 133  Yes No  126 27  Yes Yes  89 62  Yes No No Yes  — 48 17 —  Yes Yes Yes No Yes No Yes Yes  — — 44 48 — 61 93 114  Yes Yes No  50 101 94  Swift Action Cast quickened spell Cast spell (1 swift action casting time) Use quickened spell-like ability  AoO1 No No No  Page 125 125 118  Immediate Action Cast spell (1 immediate action casting time)  AoO1 Page No 124  Free Action Cease concentration on spell Draw ammunition Drop item22 Drop prone23 Fast mount or dismount (DC 20 Ride check) Fight while war mount also attacks (DC 10 Ride check) Load repeating crossbow bolt from case18 Prepare spell components24 Release grappled or pinned opponent Speak 25 Stand from prone (DC 35 Tumble check) Use extraordinary ability9  AoO1 No No No No No  Page 133 — — — —  No No No No No Yes No  89 — 124 61 — 94 118  No Action 5-foot step Attack of opportunity26 Cover from mount (DC 15 Ride check) Delay Duel of wills (Intimidate)  AoO1 Page No 90 Maybe 18 No 88 No 43 No 68  No Action Fight defensively27 Guide mount with knees (DC 5 Ride check) Identify spell being cast (Spellcraft check, DC 15 + spell level) Make Concentration check Make passive Listen check or Spot check Stay in saddle (DC 5 Ride check)  No No No No  138 33 114 88  AoO1 Page Maybe 31 Yes* 45 Yes* 60 Yes* 142 Maybe* 142 Yes* 145 Maybe — Maybe —  1 This column indicates whether an act provokes attacks of opportunity when it is performed in a threatened square. An asterisk (*) after a “Yes” or “Maybe” entry in this column indicates an that the action provokes an attack of opportunity only from the target of the action. Even if this column reads “No,” you usually provoke an attack of opportunity if you move out of a threatened square. You usually provoke an attack of opportunity from an opponent when you enter that foe’s space. 2 Activating this sort of magic item takes the same amount of time as casting the spell the item’s power duplicates. If the power doesn’t duplicate a spell, activating the item is a standard action unless its description says otherwise. See note 16 for spells that have 1-round casting times. 3 The item’s description might dictate another type of action, in which case the description takes precedence. 4 If you aid someone who is performing an action that would normally provoke attacks of opportunity, then aid another provokes attacks of opportunity. 5 This special attack provokes attacks of opportunity as normal for the movement involved. The attacker also provokes an attack of opportunity from the defender upon entering the defender’s space. 6 Provokes attacks of opportunity as normal for movement, not for the required grapple check. 7 You can attempt an overrun as a standard action taken during your movement. This is an exception to the rule that you can’t take a standard action during movement. If your target moves out of your way, you don’t use a standard action. You can choose another target to overrun if you have enough movement to make it to that target and end your movement in a legal space. 8 This standard action lets you start a full-round action, which you complete in the following round by using another standard action. If you undertake an act that would normally provoke attacks of opportunity, then this standard action provokes attacks of opportunity. You can’t use this standard action to start or complete a full attack, charge, run, or withdraw. 9 A special ability takes the indicated action to perform unless the ability’s description says otherwise. A spelllike ability that duplicates a spell with a casting time of less than 1 standard action has the same casting time as the duplicated spell. 10 A limbless creature, such as a snake, that crawls as its normal movement can crawl at its normal speed.  11 Requires a successful grapple check. 12 If you have a base attack bonus of +1 or higher, you can combine this action with moving your speed. Drawing a weapon applies to any weaponlike item, such as a wand, rod, or staff, within easy reach. An item that is stored or out of easy reach must be retrieved as a stored item. If you have the Two-Weapon Fighting feat, you can draw two light or one-handed weapons in the time it normally takes to draw one. Wands are light, and rods are one-handed. 13 Loading requires two hands. 14 Moving can include using skills such as Balance, Climb, Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Swim, and Tumble. 15 If you have a base attack bonus of +1 or higher, you can combine this act with moving your speed. Readying a shield means strapping it to an arm to use it. Loosing a shield means taking it off your arm and dropping it. 16 Unlike with a normal full-round action, which resolves during the same turn it’s taken, a spell that has a casting time of 1 round resolves just before the beginning of its caster’s next turn. 17 If you’re unable to take a full round’s worth of actions on your turn, such as during a surprise round, you can charge or withdraw as a standard action. In this case, you can move only up to your speed rather than up to double your speed. 18 Loading requires two hands. A full-round action is required only to load a new case of bolts onto a repeating crossbow. Loading a bolt from a case already attached to a repeating crossbow is a free action. 19 While the gauntlet is locked, you can’t use the hand wearing it. You can still cast spells that have somatic components if your other hand is free. 20 This includes putting a fuse in the oil. Lighting that fuse works like lighting a torch. Oil so lit has only a 50% chance of igniting once thrown but otherwise functions as alchemist’s fire (PH 128). 21 Doesn’t require a successful grapple check. 22 You can drop any carried item, including a shield you’re carrying (not wearing and gaining the shield bonus from), in your space or an adjacent square. 23 You drop prone in your space. 24 Unless the component is an extremely large or awkward item. Such an item must be retrieved as a stored item. 25 You can speak even when it isn’t your turn. Long speeches aren’t free actions. 26 If you make an attack that would normally provoke attacks of opportunity, then the attack of opportunity provokes attacks of opportunity. 27 You can fight defensively as part of an attack or full attack. 28 This attack form substitutes for a melee attack. As such, it can be used once in an attack or charge, or one or more times during a full attack. It can even be used as an attack of opportunity. 29 If the object is being held, carried, or worn by a creature, yes, but only from that creature. If not, no. 30 A feat’s description defines the action required and the effect. Using a feat provokes attacks of opportunity if the action involved does, or if the feat’s description indicates that using it provokes attacks of opportunity. 31 The skill’s description defines the action required and the effect. Disable Device, Heal, Open Lock, Search, and Use Rope provoke attacks of opportunity. Skills that involve movement provoke attacks of opportunity as appropriate for the movement involved in using the skill.  ACTIONS IN COMBAT  Action Type Varies Aid another on a check4 Disarm28 Grapple28 Sunder weapon28 Sunder object28, 29 Trip28 Use feat30 Use skill31  AoO1 Page No 55 No 88  9  AID ANOTHER Illus. by J. Thomas  Aid Another In a few circumstances, you can help an ally accomplish a task or perform better. However, additional help isn’t beneficial in some cases, such as when a character tries to fool an item utilizing Use Magic Device. In other situations, only a limited number of characters can help at once, such as when breaking down a door or turning a winch that has one small handle. DMs can limit how aid another is used as they see fit for given conditions. When multiple creatures can aid the same ally, the bonuses they provide stack. If you aid someone performing an act that would normally provoke attacks of opportunity, then the act of aiding another provokes attacks of opportunity in the same way.  AID ANOTHER FOR ABILITY CHECKS You can help an ally achieve success on an ability check by using aid another, taking the same amount of time that the ability check normally requires. To do so, you make the same kind of ability check, simulating a cooperative effort. You must roll for the check—you can’t take 10 or 20. If the result of your check is 10 or higher, the ally you’re helping receives a +2 bonus on the ability check. You’re essentially providing favorable conditions.  AID ANOTHER IN COMBAT  10  In melee combat, you can help an ally attack or defend by taking this standard action to distract or interfere with an opponent. If you’re in position to make a melee attack against an opponent that is engaging an ally in melee combat, you can attempt to aid that ally. To do so, make an attack roll against AC 10. If you succeed, you can choose to give your ally one of  two benefits—your ally gains either a +2 bonus on his next attack roll against that opponent or a +2 bonus to AC against that opponent’s next attack, as long as that attack comes before the beginning of your next turn.  AID ANOTHER FOR SKILL CHECKS You can help an ally achieve success on a skill check by using aid another. In cases when a skill restricts who can achieve certain results, you can’t use aid another to grant a bonus on a task that your character couldn’t achieve alone. A character who doesn’t have the trapfinding class feature, for instance, can’t use aid another to help a rogue on a Disable Device check to find a magic trap. When you’re able to aid another on a skill check, you do so by making the same kind of skill check, taking the same amount of time that the skill check normally requires. You must roll for the check—you can’t take 10 or 20. If the result of your check is 10 or higher, the ally you’re helping receives a +2 bonus on the skill check.  Expert Assistance If you have 5 or more ranks in a skill you’re using to aid another, you can grant a higher bonus. For every 10 points your check result exceeds 10, the circumstance bonus increases by 1. To determine the circumstance bonus quickly, simply divide the helper’s check result by 10, round down, and add 1. At the DM’s option, this rule can also be extended to using the aid another action in combat to improve an ally’s attack roll or AC. Any character who has a base attack bonus of +5 or higher can grant a greater bonus on an ally’s attack roll or AC as described above.  Antimagic An antimagic field spell or effect suppresses magic, but it doesn’t dispel that magic. Once a magical effect is no longer affected by antimagic, the magic returns. Spells that still have part of their duration left begin functioning again, magic items are once again useful, and so forth. Two antimagic areas in the same place don’t cancel each other, nor do they stack. An antimagic effect interacts with several game elements in different ways.  MAGIC ITEMS Magic items that have continuous effects don’t function in an antimagic area, but their effects aren’t canceled. This includes the enhancement bonus provided by magic armaments. In an antimagic area, for instance, the contents of a bag of holding are unavailable, but neither spill out nor disappear forever. A magic weapon used to attack from inside an antimagic area, or one used to attack a creature inside an antimagic  No supernatural ability or spell-like ability works in an antimagic area. Their effects are affected like spells (see below). Extraordinary abilities work normally.  SPELLS Spells don’t function in an antimagic area, but an antimagic area doesn’t block line of effect. If a spell’s point of origin is inside an antimagic area, that spell is entirely suppressed. When a spell’s point of origin is located outside an antimagic area, but part of that spell’s area overlaps the antimagic area, that spell’s effect is suppressed where the two areas overlap. Time elapsed within an antimagic area still counts against a spell’s duration. If an instantaneous spell is entirely suppressed, that spell is effectively canceled. (It’s suppressed, and its duration instantaneously expires.) An instantaneous area spell is only entirely suppressed and effectively canceled if its point of origin is within the antimagic area. Otherwise it works like any other area spell that has a point of origin outside the antimagic area—only where its area overlaps the antimagic area is its effect is suppressed (and effectively canceled). A wall of force, prismatic wall, or prismatic sphere isn’t affected by antimagic. Break enchantment, dispel magic, and greater dispel magic spells don’t dispel antimagic. Mordenkainen’s disjunction has a 1% chance per caster level of destroying an antimagic field. If the antimagic field survives the disjunction, no items within it are disjoined.  Illus. by E. Polak  Constructs, elementals, outsiders, and corporeal undead still function in an antimagic area. Their special abilities are affected by the antimagic as detailed below. A big creature whose space is partially within an antimagic area can choose to attack from a square not within the area, thereby suffering no adverse effects from the antimagic. Its attacks and abilities are affected by the antimagic if it attacks into the antimagic area or uses an ability on a foe within the antimagic area. Summoned creatures of any type disappear if they enter an antimagic area. Incorporeal creatures do the same. These creatures reappear in the same spot once the antimagic effect goes away, unless they were summoned by an effect whose duration has expired—see Spells, below.  SPECIAL ABILITIES ANTIMAGIC  CREATURES  area, gains none of the benefits of its magic properties. Those properties are suppressed because of the weapon’s interaction with the antimagic area. If neither the attacker nor the target is inside the antimagic area, the attack resolves normally with reference to the weapon’s magic properties.     ANTIMAGIC RAMIFICATIONS Antimagic seems like a straightforward concept; magic works, or it doesn’t. But antimagic can be troublesome. On the design side of the equation, it requires us to tag effects as spell-like, supernatural, or extraordinary. To me, the division between spell-like and supernatural sometimes seems contrived, while the separation between extraordinary and supernatural sometimes feels arbitrary. But from the concept of antimagic in general, plus the slightly different but related ability to dispel spells, this division in special abilities evolved.  In an antimagic field, only extraordinary abilities function. So if you’re a monster lucky enough to have a key ability deemed extraordinary, you might actually want to seek out areas of antimagic and lurk there, waiting for hapless creatures that use spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities to stumble upon you. Then you can show them up with your extraordinary ability to howl, throw quills, fast heal, or what have you. —Bruce R. Cordell, designer     11  Appraise Use this skill to tell a fancy show sword from an elf heirloom, high-quality jewelry from costume junk, and a fine work of art from a common one.  The skill modifiers mentioned in the text following the table assume the skill’s user was taking 10 on the relevant skill check.  Appraise  APPRAISE (INT)  APPRAISE  By taking 1 minute you can appraise the value of an object, predict what a performer might expect to receive as compensation, and even estimate the quality of craftsmanship before work is complete. You can try to appraise quickly in just 1 round, increasing the DC by 5. To evaluate a work, such as an entire poem, you must take whatever time is required to read or otherwise observe that work—this can’t be done quickly. Failure on a normal Appraise check for common items or works means a misjudgment of 2d6+3 × 10% of actual value. Failure for more valuable items or when using Appraise quickly means you can’t estimate the item’s value. You can’t try a normal Appraise check again on the same object, regardless of success. If you tried to appraise an item quickly and failed, you can then try to appraise that item normally, but you can’t try to appraise the item quickly again. You can try to appraise an item normally whether or not you successfully appraise that item quickly.  Task Tell which race made an item Appraise common item or work Appraise good item or work Appraise rare item or work Appraise exotic item or work Appraise unique item or work Conditions Appraise in 1 round  DC 10 12 15 20 25 30 DC Modifier +5  Common Items and Works Items in this category include trade goods, spices, foodstuffs, raw materials, mundane items, livestock, and so on. Items and works of this sort are usually made or performed by those who have a relevant skill modifier lower than +5.  Good Items and Works Items in this category include good cloth, rare spices, folk art, and valuable materials such as pure gold bars. Items and works of this sort are usually made or performed by those who have a relevant skill modifier of +5 to +9.  Rare Items and Works  Illus. by D. Riche  Items in this category include fine clothing, raw ore of precious metals, gems, and fi ne artwork. Items and works of this sort are usually made or performed by those who have a relevant skill modifier of +10 to +14.  Exotic Items and Works Items in this category include unusual gems (strange colorings, unusual to the region, unusually large or pure), spell components, jewelry, jewels, exotic fi ne art, and obscure religious items. Items and works of this sort are usually made or performed by those who have a relevant skill modifier of +15 to +19.  Unique Items and Works Items in this category include masterpiece artwork, extremely rare jewels, and lavish and complex religious items or jewelry. Items and works of this sort are usually made or performed by those who have a relevant skill modifier of +20 or higher.     PRECISION APPRAISING Estimating the value of loot is a nice idea. But the basic concept, that Jill or Joe Adventurer can make a reasonable estimate of the value of anything from horseflesh to fine fabrics, is still difficult to rationalize. My husband, Chris, revised rules in his home campaign for appraising items based on their general classification. Characters can purchase ranks in any or all of six different categories: precious metals and gems, objets d’art, arms and armor, food and wine, magical beasts, and domestic/common beasts and  products. These categories are arranged in a circular pattern, so that some are linked more closely than others; for example, precious metals and gems is close to objets d’art but very far from domestic beasts. Different character classes and races have starting bonuses in certain categories, and social rank can have an effect as well. A character can attempt to appraise items in any category, but a cumulative modifier of –2 per category distant from a category in which he has ranks is applied to the skill check. —Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, editor     12  Birth of a Rule by David Noonan, designer  WHAT GIVES BIRTH TO RULES TODAY? Essentially, my job is to sit at this desk and crank out new rules for you. So where do I come up with new rules? Trouble at the Table: If I see something that isn’t working at my D&D table, a new rule is often the solution. Most of our rules for polymorph and similar effects fall into that category. We created the stacking rules for D&D bonuses to help solve the confusion at the table when nobody knew which bonuses combined well with which other bonuses. It helped us with some game balance issues too, because unlimited stacking is a key ingredient in some way-toogood character builds. Extension of Another Rule: New rules tend to percolate through the system naturally. Once you’ve got a rule that lets a sorcerer change his “spells known” list, it makes a certain amount of sense to come up with a parallel rule for a warlock changing his “invocations known” list. New Blood: When you’re seizing new territory for the game, of course it’s going to give birth to a lot of new rules. The psionics rules are a good example of new territory for D&D—although it’s territory that we reclaim with each new edition of the game. And the rules we create for psionics sometimes lead us to extend other rules. Once we used swift actions and immediate actions in Expanded Psionics Handbook, we started extending them all over the place. Thin Air: Sometimes new rules just come to a game designer unbidden. Game design is like any other creative endeavor in that respect.  One of the bits of game designer jargon that we’re fond of is the notion of “exception-based rule sets.” Here’s a basic definition: An exception-based rule set has simple, straightforward rules, but a whole bunch of cool exceptions that are under at least a degree of player control. In other words, the rules of the game change depending on who’s sitting at the table and what they’ve done so far in the game. Many of us in the hobby games industry trace exceptionbased rules back to the 1977 board game Cosmic Encounter, which was a straightforward conquer-the-galaxy game—until you handed each player a card that “broke” one specific rule for him and him alone. The player with the Zombie card, for example, never truly takes casualties, and the player with the Mind card gets to see the opponent’s cards before playing his own. Once you know what you’re looking for, you see exceptionsbased rule sets throughout hobby games. The Magic: The Gathering game and other trading card games are prime examples of exception-based rules. Heck, you could make the case that the Magic rules mostly adjudicate how you bring your exceptions into play. D&D has been rife with exceptions from its inception too. They’re embedded throughout the game. Try some stuff without an exception in your pocket, and your DM will land on you like a ton of bricks. For example: Class Features: The evasion ability is an exception to the “area spells deal half damage on a successful save” rule. Feats: Combat Reflexes lets you break the “you can make only one attack of opportunity per round” rule. Spring Attack provides an exception to a more fundamental rule, letting you interrupt your own move action to make an attack, then resume the move. Magic Items: The back end of the Dungeon Master’s Guide is a rich vein of exceptions—everything from Boccob’s blessed book’s exception to the usual economics of wizard spell acquisition to Heward’s handy haversack’s exception to the “retrieve a stored item” rules to hand of glory’s exception to the “two rings per PC” rule. Monsters: I’d contend that the Monster Manual creature with the most exceptions is the hydra. It can make multiple attacks after moving. It tracks hit points separately for different body parts. PCs can use Sunder against the monster’s living heads. And there’s even an exception to an exception: Not only does the hydra have the Combat Reflexes feat (an exception), but it can use all its heads for attacks of opportunity (the exception’s exception). Races: Elves and dwarves both have built-in exceptions to the Search rules (for secret doors and stonework traps, respectively). For that matter, humans are an exception to the “one feat at 1st level” rule. Skills: Want an exception to the “take 1d6 points of damage per 10 feet fallen” rule? Try Tumble or Jump—or both, if you’ve got ’em. Need an exception to the “casting a spell provokes attacks of opportunity” rule? Check out Concentration. Spells: Dispel magic is an exception to the rule that says you must cast the same spell when you’re counterspelling. Find traps lets a cleric discover magic traps, which ordinarily is a job only for those that have trapfinding.  INTERLUDE: BIRTH OF A RULE  Take a look at the three core rulebooks. That’s almost a thousand pages of rules. So where do they all come from? We can trace a lot of our rules back to the dim mists of history—the 1970s, specifically. The most fundamental rules of D&D, such as hit points, AC, and what we used to call the “to hit” rule, all came from those little booklets with storied names: Chainmail; Greyhawk; Blackmoor; Eldritch Wizardry; Gods, Demi-Gods, & Heroes. A lot of D&D’s smaller rules come from those first books too. Ever wonder why elves are immune to paralysis? As far as we can figure out, that immunity came from a game-balance issue in the original Chainmail rules, which mostly covered medieval warfare (with a fantasy supplement that spawned the game we all play today). Masses of low-cost undead troops were beating up high-cost elf troops, so the “elves are immune to paralysis” emerged as a balancing factor. More than thirty years later, we’re still using that rule. The wellspring of fantasy literature inspired a lot of our rules, too. The Dying Earth books from Jack Vance had some influence on how D&D spellcasting works, although it’s not so easy to see the connection today. The salient feature of D&D’s cursed weapons, that you don’t want to get rid of them even after you know about the curse, comes straight from Tolkien’s One Ring and Moorcock’s Stormbringer.  IT’S REALLY AN EXCEPTION  13  Armor Armor is protective, but it can also hinder. Here are commonly used rules for armor.  ARMOR CHECK PENALTY  ARMOR  Any armor heavier than leather hurts your ability to use some skills. An armor check penalty is the modifier that applies to Balance, Climb, Escape Artist, Hide, Jump, Move Silently, Sleight of Hand, and Tumble checks made by someone wearing a certain kind of armor. Double the normal armor check penalty is applied to Swim checks. A creature’s encumbrance might apply a similar check penalty.  SHIELDS If you wear armor and use a shield, both armor check penalties apply. They stack.  NONPROFICIENCY  Illus. by S. Belledin  If you wear armor or use a shield you aren’t proficient with, you take the armor check penalty on attack rolls, as well as on all Strength-based and Dexterity-based ability and skill checks. This effectively adds Open Lock, Ride, and Use Rope to the list of penalized skills. The penalty for nonproficiency with armor stacks with the penalty for nonproficiency with shields. If you have a check penalty from encumbrance that is higher than your armor check penalty, use the encumbrance’s check penalty on skills normally affected by the armor check penalty. Use the armor check penalty on checks and rolls normally penalized for nonproficiency.  ARCANE SPELL FAILURE Armor interferes with the gestures an arcane spellcaster must make to cast an arcane spell that has a somatic component. Unless they have a class feature that says otherwise, arcane spellcasters face the possibility of arcane spell failure if they’re wearing armor and/or using a shield. A spell without a somatic component, however, can be cast with no chance of arcane spell failure. If a creature is wearing armor and using a shield, the arcane spell failure chances for the two pieces of equipment stack. When casting an arcane spell that has a somatic component, arcane spellcasters subject to arcane spell failure for the armor they’re wearing must roll d%. If the result is equal to or lower than the chance for arcane spell failure, the spell is ruined. The caster still expends the prepared spell or the slot required to cast the spell.  SPELL COMPLETION ITEMS Activating a scroll or any other spell completion item is like casting a spell for the purpose of arcane spell failure. An armored creature that activates a scroll by using Use Magic Device has the normal arcane spell failure chance.  SLEEPING IN ARMOR  14  When you sleep in medium or heavy armor, you’re fatigued the next day. Sleeping in light armor doesn’t cause fatigue.  DONNING AND REMOVING The time required to don armor depends on its type. See the following table.  Donning Armor Armor Type Shield (any)  Don 1 move action Padded, leather, 1 minute hide, studded leather, or chain shirt Breastplate, scale 4 minutes1 mail, chainmail, banded mail, or splint mail Half-plate 4 minutes2 or full plate  Don Hastily Remove n/a 1 move action 5 rounds  1 minute1  1 minute  1 minute1  4 minutes1 1d4+1 minutes1  1 If the wearer has some help, cut this time in half. A creature doing nothing else can help up to two adjacent wearers. Two wearers can’t help each other don armor at the same time. 2 The wearer must have help to don this armor. Without help, it can be donned only hastily.  Don This column tells how long it takes to put the armor on. (One minute is 10 rounds.) Readying (strapping on) a shield is only a move action.  Don Hastily This column tells how long it takes to put the armor on in a hurry. The armor check penalty and armor bonus for hastily donned armor are each 1 point worse than normal.  Remove This column tells how long it takes to take the armor off. Loosing a shield (removing it from the arm and dropping it) is only a move action.  Armor Class Your Armor Class (AC) represents how hard it is for opponents to land a damaging blow on you. It’s the attack roll result that an opponent needs to achieve to hit you. AC = 10 + size modifier + Dex modifier + armor bonus + shield bonus + deflection bonus + insight bonus + natural armor bonus + dodge bonuses + other modifiers  The bigger a creature is, the easier it is to hit. The smaller it is, the harder it is to hit. Since this same modifier applies on attack rolls, a Small creature doesn’t have a hard time hitting another Small creature. See Size, page 116.  Dexterity Modifier If your Dexterity is high, you’re adept at dodging blows. If your Dexterity is low, you’re inept at this task. That’s why you apply your Dexterity modifier to your AC. Armor limits your Dexterity bonus, so if you’re wearing armor, you might not be able to apply your whole Dexterity bonus to your AC. Sometimes you can’t react to a blow, so you’re denied your Dexterity bonus to AC, but any Dexterity penalty still applies. You lose your Dexterity bonus when, for example, an invisible opponent attacks you, you’re climbing, or you’re stunned. Being caught flat-footed at the beginning of combat is also this sort of situation—see Flat-Footed, below.  Armor and Shield Bonuses Your armor and shield each provide a bonus to AC. This bonus represents their ability to protect you from blows.  Enhancement Bonuses An enhancement bonus makes an armor bonus, natural armor bonus, or a shield bonus better. The enhancement bonus stacks as if it were part of the bonus to which it applies—armor, natural armor, or shield—so it’s not included in the AC formula above.  Deflection Bonus Magical deflection effects ward off attacks, improving AC.  Insight Bonus An uncanny knack to sense danger and react to it improves AC. Some creatures have insight bonuses to AC, and a number of magical effects provides such bonuses.  Defender is . . . Melee Balancing (4 or fewer ranks in Balance)1, 2 +0 Behind cover3 +4 Behind improved cover4 +8 Behind limited cover5 +2 Blinded1 –2 Climbing (without a climb speed)1, 6 +0 Cowering1 –2 Entangled7 +0 Fighting defensively +2 Flat-footed1 +0 Grappling (but attacker isn’t)1 +0 Helpless9 –4 Kneeling or sitting –2 Off balance due to failing a Swim check1 +0 Pinned9, 10 –4 Prone –4 Running (full-round action)1 +0 Squeezing –4 Squeezing (space less than half normal; DC 30 Escape Artist check)1 –4 Stunned1 –2 Successfully feinted by a foe1 +0 Using total defense +4  Ranged +0 +4 +8 +2 –2 +0 –2 +0 +2 +0 +08 +0 +2 +0 +0 +4 +0 –4  ARMOR CLASS  Size Modifier  Armor Class Modifiers  –4 –2 +0 +4  1 Defender is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. 2 If defender takes damage while balancing, it must make another Balance check against the same DC or fall prone. 3 Defender also receives a +2 bonus on Reflex saves. 4 Defender also receives a +4 bonus on Reflex saves and a +10 bonus on Hide checks, and benefits of evasion. 5 Defender also receives a +1 bonus on Reflex saves. 6 If defender succeeded on a Climb check after adding 20 to the Climb DC, it isn’t denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. If defender takes damage while climbing, it must make another Climb check against the same DC or fall. 7 Defender takes a –4 penalty to Dexterity, which results in a modifier 2 lower than normal. 8 Roll randomly to see which grappler you strike. 9 Treat defender’s Dexterity as 0 (–5 modifier), but only for determining AC. Defender subject to attacks, such as sneak attack, that rely on a target being denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. 10 AC penalty doesn’t apply against the pinning creature.  TOUCH Some attacks disregard your armor, shield, and natural armor. In these cases, the attacker makes a touch attack roll against your touch AC.  Natural Armor Bonus Natural armor represents an inborn or magical resistance to attacks that improves AC.  Dodge Bonuses Dodge bonuses represent actively avoiding blows. Any situation that denies you your Dexterity bonus to AC also denies you dodge bonuses. Wearing armor doesn’t limit these bonuses the way it limits a Dexterity bonus to AC. Unlike most other bonuses, dodge bonuses stack with each other.  Touch AC = AC – armor bonus – shield bonus – natural armor bonus  FLAT-FOOTED You can’t react well to danger at the beginning of combat until you’ve taken your first turn. In such cases, you use flat-footed AC. Flat-footed AC = AC – Dex bonus – dodge bonuses  Other Modifiers Circumstances can modify your Armor Class.  15  Attacks and Damage  ATTACKS AND DAMAGE  Attacking is a basic part of combat. Doing so takes a standard action or part of a full-round action (see Full Attack, below).  way can make attacks of opportunity, and such a creature doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity when attacking. (The act of casting a spell provokes attacks of opportunity as normal.)  MELEE ATTACKS  RANGED ATTACKS  With a melee weapon, a natural weapon, or even a bare fist, you can strike any opponent within reach, which is normally 5 feet for Small and Medium creatures. Opponents within 5 feet are considered adjacent to you. Some weapons and creatures have longer reach.  With a ranged weapon, you can shoot or throw at any target that is within the weapon’s maximum range (see Range Penalty). Line of sight isn’t required—you can fire at a creature that has concealment, hoping you hit your target. Intervening creatures and obstacles, however, can block your shot or provide cover for the creature you’re aiming at. You provoke attacks of opportunity when firing or throwing a ranged weapon.  Melee attack bonus = base attack bonus + Str modifier + size modifier + enhancement bonus + other modifiers  Base Attack Bonus Your class or creature type along with your character level or number of Hit Dice determine your base attack bonus. Sometimes these factors combine, such as when a creature has racial Hit Dice and then takes class levels.  Strength Modifier If your Strength is high, you can deliver more forceful blows that are capable of cutting through defenses. A creature that has a low Strength is unable to apply enough force. Therefor you apply your Strength modifier on melee attack rolls.  Enhancement Bonus Enhancement bonuses make your weapon better. Such bonuses come from masterwork or magic weapons.  Ranged attack bonus = base attack bonus + Dex modifier + size modifier + enhancement bonus + range penalty + other modifiers  Dexterity Modifier If your Dexterity is high, you’re naturally accurate with ranged weapons. If your Dexterity is low, you’re inaccurate.  Range Penalty Every ranged weapon has a range increment. Each full range increment the weapon or ammunition must travel before hitting its target imposes a cumulative –2 penalty on the attack roll. A thrown weapon has a maximum range of five range increments. A projectile weapon can shoot up to ten range increments.  Other Modifiers Other Modifiers Circumstances can modify your attack roll. See the Attack Roll Modifiers table on the facing page.  UNARMED ATTACKS Striking with punches and kicks is like attacking with a melee weapon, except that such attacks usually provoke an attack of opportunity from the foe you attack, provided that opponent is armed. The attack of opportunity comes before your attack. An unarmed attack doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity from other foes, nor does it provoke an attack of opportunity from an unarmed foe. An unarmed creature can’t make attacks of opportunity.  Natural Weapons A creature that has a natural weapon, such as a claw or slam, is considered armed. It can make unarmed attacks, but it can’t use its natural weapons as if they were unarmed attacks, nor can it apply abilities that affect only unarmed attacks to its natural weapons.  “Armed” Unarmed Attacks Sometimes a creature’s unarmed attack counts as an armed attack. A monk, a character who has the Improved Unarmed Strike feat, and a spellcaster delivering a touch attack spell all count as armed. Being armed in this way counts for both offense and defense. So a creature armed in this  16  Many circumstances that modify melee attack rolls also apply to ranged attack rolls, but some, such as the penalty imposed for shooting into a melee, apply only to ranged attack rolls. See the Attack Roll Modifiers table.  RANGED ATTACKS INTO A MELEE If you shoot or throw a ranged weapon at an opponent engaged in melee with an ally, you take a –4 penalty on your attack roll. Two creatures are engaged in melee if they’re opponents of each other and either threatens the other. An unconscious or otherwise immobilized creature isn’t considered engaged unless it’s actually being attacked. If your target is at least 2 squares from the nearest ally, you can avoid the –4 penalty. This option applies even if the creature you’re attacking is engaged in melee with an ally, provided you can aim at part of the creature that is at least 2 squares from your ally.  TOUCH ATTACKS Touch attacks come in two types—melee touch attacks and ranged touch attacks. When an attack is a touch attack, your target’s AC doesn’t include any armor bonus, shield bonus, or natural armor bonus, including enhancement bonuses to these factors. All other modifiers apply normally. To hit your target, you make a touch attack roll—ranged or melee—and all other rules that affect attack rolls still apply.  FULL ATTACK  ATTACK ROLL An attack roll represents your attempt to strike your opponent. Your attack roll is 1d20 + your attack bonus with the type of attack you’re using. If the result equals or exceeds the target’s AC, you hit and deal damage.  AUTOMATIC MISSES AND HITS A natural 1—when the d20 comes up 1—on the attack roll is always a miss. A natural 20—when the d20 comes up 20—is always a hit. A natural 20 is also a threat, which is a possible critical hit (see page 40).  DAMAGE When an attack succeeds, it deals damage. The weapon used determines the amount of damage dealt. Damage reduces a target’s current hit points, unless it’s specified as some other sort of damage. Certain attacks, creatures, and magical effects can cause other sorts of damage, such as ability damage, energy drain, or nonlethal damage. When you hit with such an attack, apply the effects of the attack as that attack’s description dictates.  DAMAGE MODIFIERS Other factors in the situation might increase or reduce damage. Commonly, damage is modified by a magical effect. Effects that modify weapon damage apply to unarmed strikes and natural weapons.  MINIMUM DAMAGE If penalties reduce the damage result to less than 1, a hit still deals 1 point of damage.  MULTIPLYING DAMAGE Sometimes damage is multiplied, such as on a critical hit. Roll the damage dice and add all modifiers multiple times. Total the results. Extra damage dice over and above a weapon’s normal damage, such as those dealt by precision damage abilities (see page 42), are never multiplied.  Specifying Damage Dealt You can specify that you are dealing lethal damage with a weapon that normally deals nonlethal damage before you make your attack roll, but you take a –4 penalty on that attack roll. You can also specify that you’re dealing nonlethal damage with a weapon that normally deals lethal damage, but you take a –4 penalty on that attack roll. See Injury, Healing, and Death, page 72.  Attack Roll Modifiers Attacker is . . . Melee Ranged Attacking an off-balance swimmer +2 +2 Dazzled –1 –1 Dealing lethal damage with nonlethal weapon –4 –4 Dealing nonlethal damage with lethal weapon –4 –4 Energy drained1 –1 –1 Entangled2 –2 –2 Fighting defensively –4 –4 Flanking defender +2 — Grappling and attacking with an unarmed strike, natural weapon, or light weapon –4 — Grappling and attacking with an opponent’s weapon after a successful grapple check –4 — Invisible3 +2 +2 Loser in duel of wills (Intimidate)4 –1 –1 Nonproficient with armor worn5 —Varies— Nonproficient with weapon used –4 –4 On higher ground than defender +1 — Prone6 –4 — Shaken or frightened –2 –2 Shooting or throwing from range7 — –2 Shooting into melee — –4 Squeezing –4 –4 Subject to rain, severe wind, sleet, or snow — –4 Underwater8 —Varies— Using an improvised weapon –4 –4 Using an inappropriately sized weapon9 –2 –2 Winner in duel of wills (Intimidate)10 +1 +1  ATTACKS AND DAMAGE  If you get more than one attack per round because your base attack bonus is high enough, because you fight with two weapons or a double weapon, or for some other reason, you must use a full-round action to be able to make your additional attacks. As you make your attacks, you specify your targets. You can see how the earlier attacks turn out before assigning the later ones. If you can make multiple attacks because your base attack bonus is high enough, you must make the attacks in order from highest bonus to lowest. You can strike with either weapon fi rst if you’re using two weapons or either part of the weapon first if you’re using a double weapon. The only movement you can take during a full attack is a 5-foot step. You can take the step before, after, or between your attacks. The extra attacks granted by the Cleave feat or the Great Cleave feat can be taken whenever they apply. This is an exception to the normal limit on the number of attacks you can make when not making a full attack.  1 Cumulative per negative level. 2 Attacker takes a –4 penalty to Dexterity, which might affect the attack roll. 3 Bonus doesn’t apply if defender is blinded. 4 Penalty is only on rolls against the winner. If defender submitted, the penalty lasts for 1 round. If defender participated, the penalty also applies on damage rolls and lasts for the entire encounter. 5 Armor check penalty applies on attack rolls. 6 Most ranged weapons can’t be used while the attacker is prone, but you can use a crossbow or shuriken while prone at no penalty. 7 Cumulative per range increment from defender. 8 See Underwater Combat, page 149. 9 Cumulative per size category of difference. 10 Bonus is only on rolls against defender that ignored or participated in the duel. If defender ignored you, and you succeeded on a DC 15 Intimidate check, the bonus is a morale bonus that lasts for 1 round. If defender participated and lost, the bonus is untyped and also applies on damage rolls, and it lasts for the encounter.  17  Attacks of Opportunity  ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY  The melee combat rules assume that combatants are actively avoiding attacks. Sometimes combatants in a melee let their guard down. In such cases, other combatants nearby can take advantage of the lapse in defense to attack for free. These free attacks are called attacks of opportunity.  THREATENED SQUARES If you’re considered armed, you threaten all squares into which you can make a melee attack, even when it isn’t your turn. That usually means everything in all squares adjacent to your space, including diagonally. An enemy that undertakes certain activities while in a threatened square provokes attacks of opportunity. If you’re considered unarmed, you don’t normally threaten any squares and thus can’t make attacks of opportunity. Certain conditions in combat, such as concealment and cover, also affect your ability to make attacks of opportunity.  Reach Most creatures of Medium or smaller size have a reach of only 5 feet. This means that they can make melee attacks only against creatures up to 5 feet (1 square) away. However, Small and Medium creatures wielding reach weapons might threaten more squares than a typical creature. Creatures larger than Medium have a natural reach of 10 feet or more, so they threaten all squares within that reach, including diagonal ones. Creatures smaller than Small typically have a natural reach of 0 feet, meaning they can’t reach into adjacent squares. Since they have no natural reach, such creatures don’t threaten the squares around them at all. See Size, page 116.  18  PROVOKING ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY Moving out of a threatened square can provoke attacks of opportunity, as can being in a threatened square while performing an act that requires focused attention.  Moving Moving out of a threatened square usually provokes an attack of opportunity from any opponent who threatens that square. Two methods of movement allow you to avoid such an attack: 5-foot step and withdraw. See Movement, page 90. Moving out of more than one square threatened by the same opponent in the same round doesn’t count as more than one opportunity for that opponent.  Focused Act When you focus your attention on what you’re doing, you divert your attention from the battle. The Actions in Combat table, page 8, notes many activities that provoke attacks of opportunity for this reason. Some such actions allow you to make a Concentration check to avoid provoking (see Concentration, page 33). Even actions that normally provoke attacks of opportunity can have exceptions.  MAKING ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY An attack of opportunity is a single melee attack you can make when you’re active in combat and an opportunity presents itself. If you’re flat-footed, you can’t make attacks of opportunity, and you don’t ever have to make an attack of opportunity if you don’t want to. Making an attack of opportunity isn’t considered an action, but you can make only one attack of  ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY  Multiple Attacks of Opportunity Some abilities allow you to make more than one attack of opportunity per round. Most such abilities, unless they say otherwise, don’t let you make more than one attack for a given opportunity. If the same opponent provokes two attacks of opportunity from you, however, you could make two separate attacks of opportunity. Each provoking act represents a different opportunity. Multiple attacks of opportunity otherwise follow the rules for normal attacks of opportunity.  Illus. by T. Nordstrand  opportunity per round unless you have an attribute that allows you to make more (see below). If you have multiple attacks for some reason, you use your highest normal attack bonus when you make your attack of opportunity, even if you’ve already attacked during the round. An attack of opportunity interrupts the normal flow of actions in the round. If an attack of opportunity is taken, immediately resolve that attack of opportunity, then continue with whatever was happening when the attack of opportunity was provoked.     CLERICAL ERROR Especially when you’ve got lots of hit points, it can be tempting to provoke attacks of opportunity willy-nilly, taking a little damage in exchange for unfettered action. That’s a valid tactical option, but a nonchalant attitude toward such attacks from powerful opponents can backfire. In a playtest a few years ago, we were fighting a frost giant jarl (not the CR 17 one in the Monster Manual), and we were hard pressed. One of us slipped out of the meeting room and grabbed a phone. Word soon went out over the building’s intercom: “Could a 7th-level cleric please report to Focus Group Room 2 immediately?” Enter Rob Heinsoo and his 7th-level cleric, possessed of both hit points and moxie in abundance. Seeing wounded comrades locked in melee with the frost giant jarl, he moved forward, eager to drop a big cure spell on the fighter.  Because the giant had reach and some advantageous terrain, Rob’s cleric provoked an attack of opportunity just for moving nearby. It’s just an attack of opportunity, right? What’s the worst that could happen? One critical hit from a massive greataxe later, Rob’s cleric was dead on the icy floor. But the disaster didn’t end there. When Rob’s cleric fell, that triggered the jarl’s Cleave feat and killed the fighter, too. The final tally for Rob’s cleric: 15 feet moved, two PCs dead. That might be the shortest PC life span I’ve ever seen. And it’s worth noting that if Rob’s cleric hadn’t been there, the fighter would have survived until his next turn—and maybe beyond. —David Noonan, designer     19  Battle Grid To help visualize the fictional world of the D&D game, use of  BATTLE GRID  a battle grid and miniature figures is recommended. A battle grid consists of a grid of 1-inch squares. Each of these squares represents a 5-foot square in the game world. See the diagram for some specifics about the battle grid. Miniatures are metal or plastic figures used to represent characters, monsters, and scenery in the game. If you don’t have miniatures, you can use some other form of markers or tokens, as long as it’s clear which token represents which object or creature. You can use the grid, along with miniatures, to show marching order or the relative location of the characters in any given situation. As its name implies, however, a battle grid is best used in a combat situation. Then the grid helps everyone determine and regulate the distance between individuals, tactical movement, line of sight, areas of spells and effects, and so on. Sometimes position in combat makes  Illus. by C. Frank  the difference between life and death. The battle grid and miniatures help everyone agree on the locations of creatures and significant objects.  MEASURING DISTANCE When measuring distance on the grid, the first diagonal counts as 1 square, the second counts as 2 squares, the third counts as 1, the fourth as 2, and so on.  Closest Creature When it’s important to determine the closest square or creature to a location, if two squares or creatures are equally close, determine the closest randomly.     BRINGING THE GAME TO LIFE My first experiences with D&D didn’t involve miniatures or a battle grid. A typical fight would involve the DM declaring which PCs were being attacked, and dice were rolled. If the thief wanted to backstab, or if the wizard wanted to take cover, only the DM’s sometimes capricious whim would allow it. One day I picked up a few metal minis, and a box of plastic D&D monsters, and quickly realized the advantage of being able to visually represent an encounter. Now the rogue’s player could see the path to take to get in a backstab, and the wizard could determine the closest doorway to duck into for cover. Combats became more tactical and efficient. Faster fights meant more encounters per session, and more time to focus on the story. My game evolved, and each year I adopted a new tool to help illustrate my games. Long before cast 3D dungeon terrain or D&D Dungeon Tiles, I cut up an old refrigerator box into cardboard  representations of the rooms of Undermountain. I graduated to giant easel pads overlaid with a transparent, dry-erasable surface. Now I use a combination of dry-erase grids, 3D terrain, computer generated or printed battle maps, and D&D Dungeon Tiles, along with a mix of D&D Miniatures and painted metal, to bring my D&D game to life. The only tradeoff to the precision of a battle grid is the sometimes odd shapes needed to represent areas, due to the nature of diagonal distance. In a simulationist effort, 3rd Edition suggested counting diagonals as 1-1/2 squares instead of 1 square (or every other diagonal counted as 2). As a result, fireballs didn’t look perfectly round, and cones worked best only when aligned along the grid or at a 45-degree angle. Templates helped matters, but the players and DM have to buy into the restrictions associated with placing such areas on the battle grid. — Stephen Schubert, developer     20  Bonuses Many racial abilities, class features, spells, and magic items offer bonuses on attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, Armor Class, ability scores, or skill checks.  STACKING  BONUS TYPES  Inherent An inherent bonus is a bonus to an ability score that results from powerful magic. A creature is limited to a total inherent bonus of +5 to any ability score.  Insight An insight bonus makes a creature better at what it’s doing by giving an almost precognitive knowledge of factors pertinent to the activity.  Luck A luck bonus represents good fortune.  Bonuses are classified by type, as described here.  BONUSES  Bonuses of different types always stack. Bonuses that have identical types don’t stack, except for dodge bonuses and some circumstance bonuses. Untyped bonuses stack unless the bonuses come from the same effect. Penalties aren’t usually typed, but identical types of penalties don’t stack. In this latter case, the worst penalty applies.  represent an increase in a weapon’s effectiveness or a general bonus to an ability score.  Morale Alchemical An alchemical bonus represents the benefit from a chemical, usually one ingested prior to receiving the bonus.  A morale bonus represents determination. Such bonuses come from mind-affecting effects.  Natural Armor Armor This is the bonus that nonmagical armor gives a creature. An effect that gives an armor bonus typically creates an invisible, tangible field of force.  A natural armor bonus is the type of bonus that many creatures have because of their tough or scaly hides.  Profane A profane bonus represents the power of evil.  Circumstance This is a bonus or penalty based on situational factors, which might apply either to a check or the DC for that check. Circumstance modifiers stack with each other, unless they arise from essentially the same circumstance.  Racial Creatures gain racial bonuses—usually to skill checks— based on the kind of creature they are.  Resistance Competence When a creature has a competence bonus, it actually becomes better at what it’s doing.  A resistance bonus is a general bonus against magic or harm. Resistance bonuses almost always affect saving throws.  Sacred Deflection A deflection bonus increases a creature’s AC by making attacks veer off.  Dodge A dodge bonus enhances a creature’s ability to get out of the way quickly. Dodge bonuses stack with other dodge bonuses, but they don’t apply whenever a creature is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC.  Enhancement An enhancement bonus represents an increase in an armor bonus, a natural armor bonus, or a shield bonus. It can also  A sacred bonus relates to the power of good.  Shield Much like an armor bonus, a shield bonus to AC represents the protection a nonmagical shield affords. An effect that gives a shield bonus usually represents an invisible, tangible shield of force that moves to protect a creature.  Size When a creature changes size due to a magical effect, some of the changes can be size bonuses or size penalties. Such modifiers stack with those granted by natural size or changes in natural size, such as when a monster advances.     BONUS BENCHWARMERS Sadly, not all bonus types are created equal. Alchemical: How many items from the core books give an alchemical bonus? Well, there’s antitoxin. Yep . . . antitoxin. Morale: This bonus type is doing well for itself, but lack of stacking is strange. “Nah, I don’t want bless. With the bard’s song, honestly, I just can’t get more pumped.”  Profane and Sacred: Sure they have consecrate/desecrate and hallow/unhallow, but these types get left out of bless, prayer, and the like, even though such spells seem to be a natural fit. To make matters worse, these types don’t appear on any items in the Dungeon Master’s Guide—not even a token bonus from a book of exalted deeds or book of vile darkness. —Logan Bonner, editor     21  BREATH WEAPON Illus. by T. Lockwood  Breath Weapon Dragon fire is the classic example, but a breath weapon can be a cloud of poisonous gas, a bolt of lightning, or a stream of acid. Breath weapons are usually supernatural abilities, and a creature needn’t be able to breathe to use one.  USING A BREATH WEAPON When using a breath weapon, a creature is actually expelling something from its mouth rather than conjuring it by means of a spell or some other magical effect. Most creatures that have breath weapons are limited to a number of uses per day or by a minimum length of time that must pass between uses. Even if a creature has more than one type of breath weapon, the time between uses is a time during which it can’t use any of its breath weapons.  Using a breath weapon is typically a standard action. No attack roll is necessary. The breath simply fills its stated area, which is usually defined like a spell’s area—see Targeting, page 134. Any creature caught in the area must succeed on the appropriate saving throw or suffer the breath weapon’s full effect.  SAVES AGAINST BREATH WEAPONS Breath weapons that deal energy damage allow a Reflex save for half damage (DC 10 + 1/2 breathing creature’s racial HD + its Con modifier; the exact DC is given in the creature’s descriptive text). Some breath weapons allow a Fortitude save or a Will save instead of a Reflex save. In many cases, a creature that succeeds on its saving throw against such a breath weapon suffers a reduced effect. Creatures are immune to their own breath weapons.     TIMELY BREATH My favorite character was “War” (Aryte ux Bahamuti tibur Aryte) a dragonborn warforged warblade 1/dragon shaman 1/barbarian 1 who had the “heart” aspect. So he was able to breathe every 1d4 rounds. At 3rd level, I took the Quicken Breath feat at the same time he became a barbarian. Then I had this really potent low-AC, high-hp fighter with great options for dishing out damage. The breath weapon was a good first move or a perfect finisher. In one memorable fight, Chase’s human warblade, “Preacher,” charged, and his charging minotaur strike nearly dropped a hobgoblin. Amber’s spellscale warmage, “Anarou,” cast hail of stone, almost taking down three goblins. War moved forward, raging, anticipating that his steel wind attack against two foes  would drop at least one. My dice failed me, getting a 1 and a 2 on the attack rolls. Scott, the DM, smiled, knowing that the bad guys were going next. Just as he was moving War’s initiative card to the back of the stack . . . “Wait!” I said. “I quicken my breath weapon. Let’s see. It’s a line, and I can get these three guys.” I was pointing to the tightly grouped, badly wounded hobgoblin and the two goblins. Two d8s clattered onto the table. “12 points! DC 18 Reflex save for half. So, 12 or 6.” Scott gave a mock serious frown. “I don’t need to bother rolling their saves. They’re all dead.” —Gwendolyn F. M. Kestrel, designer     22  Bull Rush You can make a bull rush as a standard action or as part of a charge. When you make a bull rush, you attempt to push an opponent straight back instead of damaging that foe. You can bull rush an opponent who is up to one size category larger than you, but not one larger than that.  INITIATING A BULL RUSH  RESOLVING A BULL RUSH  BULL RUSH RESULTS If you beat the defender’s Strength check result, you push the defender back 5 feet. If you wish to move with the defender, you can push it back an additional 5 feet for every 5 points by which your check result exceeds its result. You can’t, however, exceed your normal movement limit. The defender provokes attacks of opportunity if it is moved. So do you if you move with it. The two of you don’t provoke attacks of opportunity from each other for this movement. If you fail to beat the defender’s Strength check result, you move 5 feet straight back to where you were before you moved into its space. If that space is occupied, you fall prone in that space.  BULL RUSH  You move into the defender’s space, provoking an attack of opportunity from that defender. You also provoke attacks of opportunity as normal for your movement. Attacks of opportunity made by anyone other than the defender against you during a bull rush have a 25% chance of accidentally targeting the defender instead, and attacks of opportunity by anyone other than you against the defender likewise have a 25% chance of accidentally targeting you. When someone makes an attack of opportunity, roll to see whether the attack went astray, then make the attack roll against the appropriate AC.  receives a +4 bonus per size category it is larger than Medium or a –4 penalty per size category it is smaller than Medium. You get a +2 bonus if you’re charging. The defender gets a +4 bonus if it has more than two legs or is otherwise exceptionally stable.  You and the defender make opposed Strength checks. A combatant  Illus. by K. Walker     ROAST RAKSHASA Using terrain to your advantage is an exciting, dynamic part of D&D. It makes for some memorable encounters. We had fought our way through any number of nasty opponents to get at the rakshasa mastermind. He laired deep underground, where we confronted him and his fiery minions in a large cavern that had pools of lava. Our warforged fighter focused on the rakshasa while the rest of the party dealt with his entourage. At last, the mastermind stood alone, his allies  dead. Nevertheless, he was an impressive foe, resistant to most magic and weapon damage. We fought for several rounds, with him getting the better of us. At last, the player of the warforged looked up, a gleam in his eye. “I bull rush him!” Not even the rakshasa’s fiendish defenses could protect it from immersion in lava. —Gwendolyn F. M. Kestrel, designer     23  Changing Forms  CHANGING FORMS  Some special abilities allow a creature to change its form or appearance. When a creature is using any ability described in this entry, a true seeing spell or ability reveals its natural form (the form it would always be in if it couldn’t change forms at all). A creature using one of these abilities reverts to its natural form when killed, but separated body parts retain their shape. A creature can’t use one of these abilities to take the form of a creature with a template.  ALTERNATE FORM A creature that has this special quality has the ability to assume one or more specific alternate forms. Assuming an alternate form results in the following changes to the creature.  Illus. by H. Lyon  • The creature retains the type and subtype of its natural form. It gains the size of its assumed form. • The creature loses the natural weapons, natural armor, and movement modes of its natural form, as well as any extraordinary special attacks of its natural form not derived from class levels. • The creature gains the natural weapons, natural armor, movement modes, and extraordinary special attacks of its assumed form. • The creature retains the special qualities of its natural form. It doesn’t gain any special qualities of its assumed form. • The creature retains the spell-like abilities and supernatural attacks of its old form, except for breath weapons and gaze attacks. It doesn’t gain the spell-like abilities or supernatural attacks of its assumed form.  24  • The creature gains the physical ability scores (Strength, Dexterity, Constitution) of its assumed form. It retains the mental ability scores (Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma) of its natural form. • The creature retains its Hit Dice, hit points, base attack bonus, and base save bonuses, although some of these numbers might change based on its new ability scores. • The creature retains any spellcasting ability it had in its natural form, although it must be able to speak intelligibly to cast spells that have verbal components, and it must have humanlike hands to cast spells that have somatic components. • The creature is effectively camouflaged as a creature of its assumed form, and it gains a +10 bonus on Disguise checks if it uses this ability to create a disguise. • Any gear worn or carried by the creature that can’t be worn or carried in its assumed form instead falls to the ground in its space. If the creature changes size, any gear it wears or carries that can be worn or carried in its assumed form changes size to match the new size. (Nonhumanoid-shaped creatures can’t wear armor designed for humanoid-shaped creatures, and vice versa.) Gear returns to normal size if dropped.  CHANGE SHAPE A creature that has this special quality can assume the appearance of a specific creature or type of creature (usually a humanoid), but retains most of its original physical qualities. Changing shape results in the following changes to the creature. • The creature retains the type and subtype of its natural form. It gains the size of its assumed form. • The creature loses the natural weapons and movement modes of its natural form, as well as any extraordinary special attacks of its natural form not derived from class levels. • The creature gains the natural weapons, movement modes, and extraordinary abilities and attacks of its assumed form. • The creature retains all other attacks and special qualities of its natural form, except for breath weapons and gaze attacks. • The creature retains the ability scores of its natural form. • Except as described elsewhere, the creature retains all other game statistics of its natural form, including but not necessarily limited to Hit Dice, hit points, skill ranks, feats, base attack bonus, and base save bonuses. • The creature retains any spellcasting ability it had in its natural form, although it must be able to speak intelligibly to cast spells with verbal components, and it must have humanlike hands to cast spells with somatic components. • The creature is effectively camouflaged as a creature of its assumed form, and it gains a +10 bonus on Disguise checks if it uses this ability to create a disguise. • Any gear worn or carried by the creature that can’t be worn or carried in its assumed form instead falls to the ground in its space. If the creature changes size, any gear it wears or carries that can be worn or carried in its assumed form changes size to match the new size. (Nonhumanoid-shaped creatures can’t wear armor designed for humanoid-shaped creatures, and vice versa.) Gear returns to normal size if dropped.  REVISED SPELLS  ANIMAL SHAPES Transmutation (Polymorph) Level: Animal 7, druid 8, Moon 8, Scalykind 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: Up to one willing creature per level, all within 30 ft. of each other Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You transform up to one willing creature per caster level into an animal of your choice; the spell has no effect on unwilling creatures. Use the alternate form special ability to determine each subject’s new abilities, rather than the polymorph subschool. The maximum Hit Dice of an assumed form is equal to the subject’s HD or your caster level, whichever is lower, to a maximum of 20 HD at 20th level. Recipients remain in the assumed form until the spell expires or until you dismiss it for all recipients. An individual subject can choose to resume its natural form as a full-round action. Doing so ends the spell for that subject.  BALEFUL POLYMORPH Transmutation (Polymorph) Level: Druid 5, Gluttony 5, hexblade 4, Limbo 5, sorcerer/ wizard 5, wu jen 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Fortitude negates, Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  You force the subject to assume the form of a Small or smaller animal of no more than 1 HD. The subject takes on all the statistics and special abilities of an average member of the assumed form in place of its own except as follows. • The target retains its alignment and personality, within the limits of the assumed form’s ability scores. • If the target has the shapechanger subtype, it retains that subtype. • The target retains its hit points. • The target is treated as having its normal Hit Dice for purpose of adjudicating effects based on HD, such as the sleep spell, though it uses the assumed form’s base attack bonus, base save bonuses, and all other statistics derived from Hit Dice. • The target retains the ability to understand but not to speak the languages it understood in its natural form. It can write in the languages it understands only if the assumed form is capable of writing in some manner, such as drawing in the dirt with a paw.  CHANGING FORMS  A number of spells allow or force a creature to change shape, such as alter self, animal shapes, baleful polymorph, polymorph, and shapechange. Spell-like abilities can resemble these spells as well. The spell descriptions delineate how these spells work, but a few have changed significantly since the publication of the Player’s Handbook and are presented here. For more information on the polymorph subschool, see page 122.  With those exceptions, the game statistics of the assumed form replace the target’s normal ones. The target loses all the special abilities it has in its natural form, including its class features. All items worn or carried by the subject fall to the ground in the subject’s space, even if they could be worn or carried by the assumed form. If the assumed form would prove fatal to the creature— such as if you polymorphed a landbound target into a fish, or an airborne target into a toad—the subject gets a +4 bonus on the save. If the subject remains in the assumed form for 24 consecutive hours, it must attempt a Will save. If this save fails, the subject loses its ability to understand language, as well as all other memories of its previous form, and its Hit Dice and hit points change to match an average creature of its assumed form. These abilities and statistics return to normal if the effect is later ended. Incorporeal or gaseous creatures are immune to baleful polymorph. A creature of the shapechanger subtype can revert to its natural form as a standard action, ending the spell’s effect.     FOOL ME TWICE, SHAME ON YOU When I first used a doppelganger, the scene played out well. The doppelganger “doubled” a PC. Before any of the players knew what had happened, I took that player aside and gave him a choice between playing his character or playing the doppelganger. Of course, he took the opportunity to mess with his buddies. When the character and his double showed up simultaneously, the conflict began. Everybody knew one was a fake, but questioning failed to reveal the impostor. Tempers began to flare. Suddenly, one of the players pointed at the character I was controlling (the real one, remember) and said, “I kill that one.”  The resulting combat was fatal only for the doppelganger. Hard feelings persisted between the “doubled” character and his wouldbe killer, but friendship between the players kept it from becoming personal. The players still talk about that encounter. When I used a doppelganger in this way again, against more experienced players, the encounter lasted 5 minutes. The players’ (and characters’) reactions to the situation seemed routine. Solving the mystery was about as challenging as kicking an extra point. —Andy Collins, developer     25  a minor physical alteration of the druid’s appearance, within the limits described for the spell.  CHANGING FORMS  WILD SHAPE  SHAPECHANGE  Illus. by T. Lockwood  Transmutation (Polymorph) Level: Animal 9, druid 9, Limbo 9, Scalykind 9, sorcerer/wizard 9, wu jen 9 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 min./level (D) This spell functions like polymorph, except that it enables you to assume the form of any single nonunique creature (of any type) from Fine to Colossal size. The assumed form can’t have more than your caster level in Hit Dice (to a maximum of 25 HD). Unlike polymorph, this spell allows incorporeal or gaseous forms to be assumed. You gain all extraordinary and supernatural abilities of the assumed form, but you lose your own supernatural abilities. You also gain the type of the assumed form in place of your own. The assumed form doesn’t disorient you. Parts of your body or pieces of equipment that are separated from you don’t revert to their natural forms. You can become just about anything you’re familiar with, changing form up to once each round as a free action. The change can’t take place during another action. If you use this spell to create a disguise, you get a +10 bonus on your Disguise check. Focus: A jade circlet worth at least 1,500 gp, which you must place on your head when casting the spell. This focus melds into your assumed form.  DRUIDS Druids have a couple class features that are significantly altered from the Player’s Handbook.  A THOUSAND FACES  26  At 13th level, a druid gains the supernatural ability to change her appearance at will, as if using the disguise self spell, but only while in her natural form. This change affects the druid’s body but not her possessions. It isn’t an illusory effect, but  At 5th level, a druid gains the supernatural ability to assume the form of any Small or Medium animal and change back again to her natural form once per day. The druid’s options for new forms include all creatures of the animal type (see Monster Manual). This ability functions like alternate form, except as noted here. Changing to an assumed form or back to natural form is a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. The effect lasts for 1 hour per druid level, or until she changes back. The form chosen must be that of an animal the druid has seen or could reasonably know about. The assumed form’s Hit Dice can’t exceed the character’s druid level. Each time a druid uses use wild shape, she regains 1 hit point per Hit Die. A druid loses her ability to speak while in animal form because she is limited to the sounds that a normal, untrained animal can make, but she can communicate normally with other animals of the same general grouping as her assumed form. For instance, the normal sound a wild parrot makes is a squawk, so changing to this form doesn’t permit speech. Any gear worn or carried by the druid melds into the assumed form and becomes nonfunctional. When the druid reverts to her natural form, any objects previously melded into the assumed form reappear in the same location on her body that they previously occupied and are once again functional. Any new items worn in the assumed form fall off and land in the druid’s space. A druid can use this ability more times per day at 6th, 7th, 10th, 14th, and 18th level. In addition, she gains the ability to take the shape of a Large animal at 8th level, a Tiny animal at 11th level, and a Huge animal at 15th level. At 12th level, a druid becomes able to use wild shape to change into a plant creature, with the same size restrictions as for animal forms. A druid can’t use this ability to take the form of a plant that isn’t a creature. At 16th level, a druid becomes able to use wild shape to change into a Small, Medium, or Large elemental (air, earth, fire, or water) once per day. These elemental forms are in addition to her normal wild shape usage. In addition to the normal effects of wild shape, the druid gains all the elemental’s extraordinary, supernatural, and spell-like abilities. She also gains the elemental’s feats for as long as she maintains the wild shape, but she retains her own creature type. At 18th level, a druid becomes able to assume elemental form twice per day, and at 20th level she can do so three times per day. At 20th level, a druid can use this wild shape ability to change into a Huge elemental.  Charge Charging is a special full-round action that allows you to move up to twice your speed and attack. Charging carries tight restrictions on how you can move.  INITIATING A CHARGE  Restricted Activity If you’re unable to take a full round’s worth of actions on your turn, such as during a surprise round, you can charge as a standard action. In this case, you can move up to your speed rather than up to double your speed. All other rules for charging still apply.  Balancing during a Charge You can make a Balance check to charge across a precarious surface, but you take a –5 penalty on the check for each multiple of your speed (or fraction thereof) that you charge. Charging in this way requires one Balance check for each multiple of your speed (or fraction thereof) that you charge. Any check that fails carries the normal ramifications for  Flying during a Charge A creature that fl ies can make dive attacks. A dive attack works just like a charge, but the diving creature must move a minimum of 30 feet and descend at least 10 feet. It can make only claw or talon attacks, but these deal double damage.  Jumping during a Charge You can make a long jump to avoid an obstacle as part of a charge, as long as you continue to meet all other criteria for making a charge before, during, and after the jump.  Tumbling during a Charge You can tumble during a charge, as long as you continue to meet all other criteria for making a charge before, during, and after tumbling.  CHARGE  If you don’t have line of sight to the opponent you want to charge at the start of your turn, you can’t charge that foe. To charge, you must move at least 10 feet (2 squares) and can move up to double your speed. You must be able to reach the closest space from which you can attack the designated opponent. This movement must occur before your attack. If any line from your starting space to the ending space passes through a square that blocks movement, is difficult terrain, or contains a creature (not a helpless one), you can’t charge. You can’t charge if the ending space is occupied or blocked. Since you move to charge, you can’t take a 5-foot step during the same turn. You provoke attacks of opportunity as normal for your movement.  failing a Balance check (see page 90), likely ending your movement and preventing your charge.  RESOLVING A CHARGE After moving, you can make a single melee attack. Only special abilities that specifically allow multiple attacks as part of a charge can give you more than one attack. Since you use the momentum of the charge in your favor, you receive a +2 bonus on any attack roll made during your turn when you charge. If your attack is a bull rush, you get a +2 bonus on the opposed Strength check. Because a charge is reckless, you take a –2 penalty to your AC until the start of your next turn.  Weapons and Charges Certain weapons deal double damage when readied (set) and used against a charging creature. Other weapons deal double damage when used during a charge.  27  Charm and Compulsion  CHARM AND COMPULSION  Many abilities and spells can cloud the mind, leaving creatures unable to tell friend from foe or, worse yet, deceiving them into thinking that their former friends are now their worst enemies. Two kinds of enchantments affect creatures in this way—charms and compulsions. Regardless whether a creature is charmed or compelled, it doesn’t volunteer information it isn’t asked for. Charms and compulsions are mind-affecting effects.  Illus. by T. DiTerlizzi  CHARM  28  •  •  charmed creature uses the least lethal means as long as such tactics show any possibility of success, just as the charmed creature would do in a fight between two actual friends. A charmed creature is entitled to an opposed Charisma check against the charming creature to resist requests to do something it wouldn’t normally do even for a friend. If successful, the charmed creature decides not to go along with that particular request but remains charmed. A charmed creature never submits to a request that is obviously suicidal or grievously harmful. If the charming creature requests that the charmed creature do something that the charmed creature is violently opposed to, the charmed creature can make a new saving throw to break free of the charming effect’s influence altogether. A charmed creature is freed of the charming effect if it is openly attacked by the charming creature or by that creature’s apparent allies.  Charming another creature usually makes that creature friendly according to the Influencing NPC Attitudes table (see page 66). Charms of this type include the various charm spells. A charmed creature retains free will but makes choices according to a skewed view of the charming creature.  •  • A charmed creature doesn’t gain any magical ability to understand its new friend’s language. • A charmed creature retains its original alignment and allegiances, with the exception that it now regards the charming creature as a friend and gives great weight to that creature’s suggestions and directions. • A charmed creature fights former allies only if those allies threaten the charming creature. Even then, the  Compulsion overrides the subject’s free will in some way or simply changes the way the subject’s mind works. A compulsion makes the subject obey the effect’s parameters or the effect’s creator, or both.  •  COMPULSION  Checks The whole game can be boiled down to the characters trying to accomplish various tasks, the DM determining how difficult those tasks are to accomplish, and the dice determining success or failure. Combat and spellcasting have their own rules, while checks handle just about everything else.  MAKING CHECKS  DIFFICULTY CLASS Some checks are made against a Difficulty Class (DC). The DC is a number that you must score as a result on your check to succeed.  Some situations make a check easier or harder, resulting in a bonus or penalty on the check or a change in the DC of the check. The chance of success can be altered in four ways to take into account exceptional circumstances. • A +2 circumstance bonus represents conditions that improve performance, such as having the perfect tool for the job, getting help from another (see Combining Effort, below), or possessing unusually accurate information. • A –2 circumstance penalty represents conditions that hamper performance, such as being forced to use improvised tools or having misleading information. • Reducing the DC by 2 represents circumstances that make the task easier, such as having a friendly audience or doing work that can be flawed. • Increasing the DC by 2 represents circumstances that make the task harder, such as having an uncooperative audience or doing work that must be flawless.  CHECKS  To make a check, roll 1d20 and add the appropriate modifiers. The higher the result, the better. Unlike with attack rolls and saving throws, a natural roll of 20 isn’t an automatic success, and a natural roll of 1 isn’t an automatic failure.  CONDITIONAL MODIFIERS  Example Difficulty Classes Difficulty (DC) Very easy (0)  Task (Skill Used) Climb a knotted rope while braced on a wall (Climb) Easy (5) Jump 5 feet (Jump) Average (10) Hear an approaching guard (Listen) Tough (15) Rig a wagon wheel to fall off (Disable Device) Challenging (20) Swim in stormy water (Swim) Formidable (25) Open an average lock (Open Lock) Heroic (30) Tumble through an enemy’s space on ice (Tumble) Nearly Track a squad of orcs across hard ground impossible (40) after 24 hours of rainfall (Survival)  TIME Completing a task might take a round, take no time, or take several rounds or even longer. Most skill uses are standard actions, move actions, or full-round actions. Some checks are instant and represent reactions to an event, or they’re part of another action.  TRYING AGAIN In general, you can try a check again if you fail, and you can keep trying indefinitely. Some checks, especially with skills, have consequences for failure that must be taken into account. Trying again can be useless once a check has failed on an attempt to accomplish a particular task. For most checks, success on a given task makes additional successes meaningless.  Conditions that affect your ability to perform the check change the check’s modifier. Conditions that modify how well you have to perform the skill to succeed change the DC. A bonus on the skill modifier and a reduction in the check’s DC have the same result—they create a better chance of success. But they represent different circumstances, and sometimes that difference is important. The only numbers that the DM and the player need to remember when calculating all the situational modifiers are +2 and –2. Multiple conditions add up to give the check a total modifier and the DC a final value. Extremely favorable or unfavorable circumstances can cause modifiers greater than +2 and less than –2.  DEGREES OF SUCCESS OR FAILURE Degrees of success usually apply only when the amount of information the DM has to give can be different depending on how well the check succeeds. Beating the DC by more begets more exact or detailed information. Most of the time, it only matters whether the check succeeds or fails. Failure is usually a sufficient problem. However, failure can sometimes cause additional difficulty. When such consequences exist, a check that fails by 5 or more causes them to occur. Skills that carry an additional risk on a failed check include Balance (fall), Climb (fall), Craft (ruin materials), Disable Device (trigger device), Spot (receive false information from reading lips), Swim (go underwater), and Use Rope (fail to secure grappling hook). Other failure risks might apply, at the DM’s discretion.     DICEY NARRATION In D&D, the system is largely binary—yes or no—so it’s usually an all-or-nothing outcome when the d20 rolls. However, the degree of success or failure can always matter in your game. All you have to do, as DM, is use the degree of success or failure to determine how you describe the action. A leaper who fails a Jump check by 1 might have missed the other side, but only by inches. That’s different from stretching for the landing when failing by 4, even though a jumper that fails by 4 or less needs to clamber up after just catching the other side. If two enemies are scrambling for the same  item, you might use a Dexterity check. If the winner only wins by 1, that’s an opportunity for you to make it questionable who grabs the item for an intense second or two. When a climber fails by 6, you can even make the player think everything’s fine after a slight slip—right before that second slide turns into a real fall. This narrative style isn’t just for checks. In combat, near misses make the scene more real. They also give your players hints at what they really need to roll to hit the bad guy, a guessing game that can make missing a little less disappointing. —Chris Sims, editor     29  SKILL CHECKS A skill check takes into account training (skill rank), natural talent (ability modifier), and luck (the die roll). It might also take into account a race’s knack for doing certain tasks (racial bonus) or what armor you’re wearing (armor check penalty), or a certain feat you possess, among other modifiers.  UNTRAINED SKILL CHECKS  CHECKS  If you attempt to use a skill you don’t possess, you make a skill check as normal. The skill modifier doesn’t have a skill rank added in because you have no ranks in the skill. Any other applicable modifiers, such as the modifier for the skill’s key ability, are applied to the check. Many skills can be used only by someone who is trained in them.  ABILITY CHECKS  Illus. by S. Prescott  Sometimes you try to do something to which no specific skill applies. In these cases, you make an ability check by rolling and adding the appropriate ability modifier. Essentially, you’re making an untrained skill check. In some cases, an act is a straight test of one’s ability with no luck involved. Just as you wouldn’t make a height check to see who is taller, you don’t make a Strength check to see who is stronger. The game has no rules for trying to stay awake through the night, writing down every word someone says without a mistake, or opening the stuck lid of a container without spilling a single drop of its contents. However, in the course of an adventure, any of these situations could  30  potentially make or break an encounter. The DM has to be ready to make up checks for such nonstandard activities. The three kinds of ability checks a DM could call for to handle a nonstandard situation include the following. • A single check using a relevant ability. • One ability check that, depending on the result, might provide a modifier on another check involving a different ability. • Two or more separate ability checks, usually involving different abilities, to accomplish a multipart task. The DM can also use a combination of an ability check and a skill check in an appropriate situation. Decisions on how to handle nonstandard situations are left to the DM’s best judgment.  Example Ability Checks Task Breaking open a jammed or locked door Threading a needle Staying awake all night Navigating a maze Recognizing a stranger you’ve seen before Getting oneself singled out in a crowd Writing down every word someone says  Ability Strength1 Dexterity Constitution Intelligence Wisdom Charisma Dexterity and Intelligence2 Strength, then Dexterity  Opening a stuck lid without spilling a container’s contents 1 See Objects, page 106. 2 Succeeding on a DC 10 Dexterity check provides favorable conditions (+2) on the Intelligence check.  CASTER LEVEL CHECKS When you try to accomplish certain tasks using magic, you must make a caster level check. To make such a check, roll a d20 and add your caster level for the spell or effect you’re casting or using (usually your level in the appropriate spellcasting class plus applicable modifiers or your Use Magic Device check result –20). Common caster level checks include the one required to overcome spell resistance, the dispel checks required when using dispel magic, and the one required to activate a scroll that contains a spell of too high a level for you to cast.  CHECKS WITHOUT ROLLS A check represents an attempt to accomplish some task, usually while under some sort of time pressure or distraction. Sometimes, though, you can use a skill under more favorable conditions and eliminate the luck factor.  TAKING 10 When you aren’t being threatened or distracted, you can take 10. Instead of rolling 1d20 for the check, calculate your result as if you had rolled a 10. For many routine tasks, taking 10 makes them automatically successful. Distractions or threats (such as combat) make it impossible for you to take 10. In most cases, taking 10 is purely a safety measure—you expect an average roll to succeed but fear a poor roll might fail, so you elect to settle for the average roll. Taking 10 is especially useful in situations where a high roll doesn’t help. It can also speed up play in situations where repeated rolls are necessary. Taking 10 is a good idea whenever you know the result will be a success.  TAKING 20 When you have plenty of time—2 minutes for a skill that can normally be checked in 1 round, one full-round action, or one standard action—you’re faced with no threats or distractions, and the skill being attempted carries no penalties for failure, you can take 20. In other words, you should roll a 20 on 1d20 if you roll enough times. Instead of rolling 1d20 for the check, just calculate your result as if you had rolled a 20. Taking 20 means you’re trying until you get it right, and it assumes that you fail many times before succeeding. Taking  CASTER LEVEL CHECKS The normal take 10 and take 20 rules apply to skill and ability checks. Neither rule applies to caster level checks.  COMBINING EFFORT When multiple creatures try the same check at the same time for the same purpose, their efforts can overlap.  CHECKS  OPPOSED CHECKS An opposed check is a check whose success or failure is determined by comparing one check result to another check result. In an opposed check, the higher result succeeds, while the lower result fails. In case of a tie, the higher modifier wins. If the modifiers are the same, roll again to break the tie.  20 takes twenty times as long as making a single check would take. You can’t take 20 on any check that has consequences for failure. Since taking 20 assumes that you fail many times before succeeding, you would incur the consequences before completing the task if you did take 20. Common “take 20” skills include Escape Artist, Open Lock, and Search.  INDIVIDUAL EVENTS Often, several characters attempt some deed, and each succeeds or fails independently. For instance, the result of one character’s Climb check doesn’t influence the results of other characters’ Climb checks. If you have 5 or more ranks in a skill and are using that skill in a task, you can accept a –4 penalty on your check to grant a +2 circumstance bonus on allies’ checks using the same skill to accomplish the same task. If you have 15 or more ranks in the skill, you can accept a –10 penalty on the check to grant a +5 circumstance bonus instead. To benefit, an ally must be within 30 feet of you, and you must be able to see and hear each other. Balance, Bluff, Climb, Craft, Diplomacy, Escape Artist, Handle Animal, Hide, Move Silently, Ride, Search, Survival, and Swim checks can be assisted in this way. The DM can rule other skills eligible in special circumstances.  AID ANOTHER You can help another character achieve success on a check by making the same kind of check in a cooperative effort. See Aid Another, page 10.  SKILL SYNERGY It’s possible for you to have two skills that work well together. Having 5 or more ranks in one skill gives you a +2 bonus on skill checks with each of its synergistic skills, as noted in the skill description. In some cases, this bonus applies only to specific uses of the skill in question, not to all checks. Some skills provide benefits on other checks, such as those required to use certain class features.     SCORE! Getting players to take 10 can be like pulling teeth. John Saxon Wendell, a player in my campaign, wanted his elf cleric to climb down a narrow shaft in The Forge of Fury. So, with no prompting, he rolled . . . and failed. He complained that his heroic character shouldn’t have failed in that situation. He was right. He should’ve taken 10. In all fairness, though, he didn’t know he could—we were all new to 3rd Edition way back in early 2001. I’ve made taking 10 easier in my games. Every player adds 10  to each skill modifier to come up with what I call a “skill score.” If the DC for a check in a nonstressful situation (and even some stressful situations) is below a PC’s score, that character succeeds without a check. This house rule is also useful for determining what a character knows readily—anything below the score in the relevant Knowledge skill. Information from DCs higher than the score require a normal check. Skill scores are useful for passive Listen and Spot checks too. Using them really speeds up play. —Chris Sims, editor     31  Concealment One way to avoid attacks is to make it hard for opponents to know where you are. Concealment encompasses all circumstances when nothing physically blocks a blow or shot but when something interferes with an attacker’s accuracy. Typically, concealment is provided by fog, smoke, shadowy illumination, darkness, tall grass, foliage, or magical effects that make it difficult to pinpoint a target’s location.  CONCEALMENT  DETERMINING CONCEALMENT To determine whether your target has concealment from your ranged attack, choose a corner of your square. If any line from this corner to any corner of the target’s square passes through a square or border that provides concealment, the target has concealment. When you make a melee attack against an adjacent target, your target has concealment if its space is entirely within an effect that grants concealment, such as a cloud of smoke.  When you make a melee attack against a target that isn’t adjacent to you, such as with a reach weapon, use the rules for determining concealment from ranged attacks. In addition, some magical effects provide concealment against all attacks, regardless of whether any intervening concealment exists.  EFFECTS OF CONCEALMENT Concealment gives the subject of a successful attack a 20% chance that the attacker missed because of the concealment. If the attacker hits, the defender must make a miss chance percentile roll to avoid being struck. To expedite play, make both rolls at the same time—and the DM should keep miss chance rolls for monsters and NPCs secret for those times when the players shouldn’t know such a roll’s result (see Invisibility, page 76). Multiple concealment conditions don’t stack. If a creature receives miss chances from multiple sources, such as from being incorporeal and having concealment, only the highest miss chance applies.  Hide Checks You can use concealment to make a Hide check. Without concealment, you usually need cover to make a Hide check.  TOTAL CONCEALMENT  Illus. by N. Sackda  If you have line of effect (see page 80) to a target but not line of sight (see page 81), that target is considered to have total concealment from you. You can’t attack an opponent that has total concealment, though you can attack into a square that you think that foe occupies. You can’t make attacks of opportunity against an opponent that has total concealment, even if you know what square or squares the opponent occupies.  Miss Chance A successful attack into a square occupied by an enemy that has total concealment has a 50% miss chance.  IGNORING CONCEALMENT Certain attributes allow a creature to ignore concealment, so concealment isn’t always effective. For instance, darkness doesn’t provide any concealment against an opponent that has darkvision.  DEGREES OF CONCEALMENT It usually isn’t worth differentiating between more degrees of concealment. However, the DM can rule that certain situations provide more or less than typical concealment, and modify the miss chance accordingly.     ROLL MISS CHANCE FIRST Although the concealment rules behave as intended—they make you miss and feel very different from the rules for cover—they have a weird effect on play. The miss chance roll turns into a roll to determine if you have fun. If you don’t miss due to concealment, you can have the normal fun of hitting. If you fail to hit due to concealment, you get the disappointment of missing and the feeling that you wasted time making the attack roll. The mechanic achieves its goals, but it can make combat tedious and playing less fun.  Many players get around that problem by simply rolling the miss chance before making an attack roll. It saves time and negates some of the sense of disappointment. Feel free to use this variant, but be aware that abilities that require you to declare their use before an attack roll, such as a paladin’s smite evil, should be declared before the miss chance roll instead. —Matthew Sernett, designer     32  Concentration Concentration allows you to maintain steely focus even when  Entangled You’re entangled if you have the entangled condition.  distracted. It’s essential for spellcasting.  Grappling or Pinned  CONCENTRATION (CON)  The only spells you can cast while grappling or pinned are those that have no somatic components and whose material components you have in hand.  Vigorous Motion This type of motion includes riding on a moving mount, taking a bouncy ride in a wagon, being on a small boat in rough water, being belowdecks on a storm-tossed ship, or being jostled in a similar fashion.  Violent Motion This type of motion includes riding on a galloping horse, taking a very rough ride in a wagon, riding on a small boat in rapids or in a storm, being on deck on a storm-tossed ship, or being tossed roughly about in a similar fashion.  CONCENTRATION  You must make a Concentration check whenever you’re distracted while engaged in an activity that requires your full attention. Such acts include casting a spell, concentrating on an active spell, directing a spell, using a spell-like ability, or using a skill that provokes attacks of opportunity. A distraction strikes during a task you’re attempting if it comes between when you start and when you complete that act (for a deed that takes 1 round or more), or if it comes in response to your initiating that activity (such as an attack of opportunity provoked by what you’re doing or a contingent attack, such as a readied action). If no distraction occurs during your activity, you usually don’t need to make a Concentration check. The following table summarizes various types of distractions that force you to make a Concentration check, as well as the DCs for those distractions.  Extraordinarily Violent Motion This type of motion includes any extreme situation the DM deems worse than violent motion, such as an earthquake.  Concentration DC1 10 + damage dealt 10 + 1/2 continuous damage last dealt Distracted by nondamaging spell Spell’s save DC Entangled 15 Grappling or pinned 20 Vigorous motion 10 Violent motion 15 Extraordinarily violent motion 20 Bad weather 5 Severe weather 10 Distraction Injury Taking continuous damage  Situation Casting or acting defensively  DC1 15  1 If you’re trying to cast, concentrate on, or direct a spell when the distraction occurs, add the level of the spell to the indicated DC.  Injury Injury is damage from any source.  Continuous Damage If you’re taking continuous damage, such as from a Melf’s acid arrow spell, half the damage is considered to take place while you’re taking your actions. If the last damage dealt was the final damage that the effect could deal, then the damage is over and can’t distract you. Repeated damage isn’t the same as and doesn’t count as continuous damage.  Distracting Spell Distracting spells might create situations similar to other entries on this table, such as violent motion or weather. If the spell normally allows no save, use the save DC it would have if it did allow a save.  Bad Weather Bad weather includes conditions such as high wind carrying blinding rain or sleet.  Severe Weather Severe weather includes conditions such as wind-driven hail, dust, or debris.  SUCCESS OR FAILURE If the Concentration check succeeds, you can continue with what you were doing as normal. If the check fails, you fail at what you were trying to do, wasting your effort. If you were in the process of casting a spell, the spell is lost. If you were concentrating on an active spell, the spell ends as if you had ceased concentrating on it. If you were directing a spell, the direction fails but the spell remains active. If you were using a spell-like ability, that use of the ability is lost. A skill use also fails, and in some cases, a failed skill check might have other ramifications.  CASTING OR ACTING DEFENSIVELY You can use Concentration to cast a spell, use a spell-like ability, or use a skill while also paying attention to your safety during combat. If the Concentration check succeeds, you can attempt one of the acts mentioned above without provoking attacks of opportunity for doing so. If the Concentration check fails, the related act also fails, with any appropriate consequences. Your effort is wasted, just as if your concentration had been disrupted by a distraction. A successful Concentration check doesn’t allow you to make another check without rolling if you’re in a stressful situation—you must make that check normally. Acting defensively can’t be applied to other acts that might provoke attacks of opportunity unless the description of that activity says otherwise.  33  Illus. by R. Horsley  CONDITIONS  Conditions This section lists adverse conditions a creature might be sub-  34  jected to. Each condition is described either here or elsewhere in this book (as indicated by a page reference). If more than one condition affects a creature, apply them all. If certain effects can’t combine, apply the most severe one. Ability Damaged: See page 6. Ability Drained: See page 6. Blinded: A blinded creature can’t see. It takes a –2 penalty to Armor Class, is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC, moves at half speed, and takes a –4 penalty on Search checks and on most Strength- and Dexterity-based skill checks. All checks and activities that rely on vision (such as reading and Spot checks) fail. All opponents are considered to have total concealment against the blinded creature. A blinded creature pinpoints targets and deals damage to them as if those targets were invisible. Blinded creatures are immune to gaze attacks and other attacks that require the target to be able to see in order to be affected. Blown Away: Depending on its size, a creature can be blown away by winds of high velocity. Each round a creature on the ground is blown away, it is knocked down and rolls 1d4×10 feet, taking 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet. In each round when a flying creature is blown away, it is blown back 2d6×10 feet and takes 2d6 points of nonlethal damage due to battering and buffeting. Checked: A checked creature is prevented from achieving forward motion by an applied force, such as wind. Checked creatures that are on the ground merely stop. Checked creatures that are flying move back a distance specified in the description of the effect. Confused: A confused creature’s activities are determined by rolling d% at the beginning of its turn: 01–10, attack caster with melee or ranged weapons (or close with caster if attacking isn’t possible); 11–20, act normally; 21–50, do nothing but babble incoherently;  51–70, flee away from caster at top possible speed; 71–100, attack nearest creature (for this purpose, a familiar counts as part of the subject’s self). A confused creature that can’t carry out the indicated activity does nothing but babble incoherently. Attackers gain no special advantage when attacking a confused creature. Any confused creature that is attacked always retaliates against its attackers on its next turn, as long as it’s still confused when its turn comes. A confused creature doesn’t make attacks of opportunity against any creature that it isn’t already devoted to attacking either because of its most recent attack or because it has just been attacked. Cowering: A cowering creature is frozen in fear or awe, unable to take actions. It takes a –2 penalty to AC and loses its Dexterity bonus (in all applications). Dazed: A dazed creature is unable to act normally. It can take no actions but has no penalty to AC. A dazed condition typically lasts for 1 round. Dazzled: A dazzled creature is unable to see well because of overstimulation of the eyes. It takes a –1 penalty on attack rolls, Search checks, and Spot checks. Dead: See page 73. Deafened: A deafened creature can’t hear. It takes a –4 penalty on initiative checks, automatically fails Listen checks, and has a 20% chance of spell failure when casting spells that have verbal components. Dehydrated: Creatures that have taken nonlethal damage from lack of water are considered dehydrated and become fatigued. In addition, if a dehydrated creature would take nonlethal damage from hot conditions (see page 155), that damage instead becomes lethal damage. Disabled: See page 72. Dying: See page 73. Energy Drained: See page 49.  attention. The only action such a creature can take on its turn is a single move action. This condition affects only living creatures (any not of the construct, deathless, or undead types). Panicked: See page 53. Paralyzed: A paralyzed creature is frozen in place and helpless. Such a creature has effective Dexterity and Strength scores of 0, but it can still undertake purely mental activities. A winged creature flying in the air at the time that it becomes paralyzed can’t flap its wings and falls. A paralyzed swimmer can’t swim and might drown. Petrified: A petrified creature has been turned to stone and is considered unconscious. If a petrified creature cracks or breaks, but the broken pieces are joined with the body as it returns to flesh, the creature is unharmed. If the creature’s petrified body is incomplete when it returns to flesh, the body is likewise incomplete. The DM must then decide whether the creature is subject to permanent hit point loss and/or some form of debilitation. Pinned: A pinned creature is held stationary (but not helpless) for 1 round. It can’t take any actions the pinning creature doesn’t allow, even speaking. A pinned creature takes a –4 penalty to AC against opponents other than the pinning creature. It can’t move, so its Dexterity is considered to be 0 for the purpose of determining AC (–5 modifier). It is also subject to attacks, such as sneak attacks, that rely on a defender’s being denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. Prone: A prone creature is lying flat on the ground. Any creature, even a limbless one such as a snake, that can flatten itself on the ground can choose to be prone, even if it can’t reasonably be tripped or knocked down. An attacker that is prone takes a –4 penalty on melee attack rolls and can’t use ranged weapons aside from crossbows and shuriken. A defender that is prone gains a +4 bonus to Armor Class against ranged attacks, but takes a –4 penalty to AC against melee attacks. Standing up is a move action that provokes attacks of opportunity. Rebuked: A rebuked creature has been affected by a turning attempt to rebuke. Rebuked creatures cower in awe for 10 rounds. Shaken: See page 53. Sickened: A sickened creature is experiencing physical discomfort. The creature takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks. This condition affects only living creatures (any not of the construct, deathless, or undead types). Stable: See page 73. Staggered: A staggered creature is one whose nonlethal damage exactly equals its current hit points. A staggered creature can take a single move action or standard action each round (but not both, nor can it take full-round actions). A creature whose nonlethal damage exceeds its current hit points becomes unconscious. Stunned: A stunned creature drops everything it was holding, can’t take actions, takes a –2 penalty to AC, and is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. Turned: A turned creature has been affected by a turning attempt. A turned creature flees for 10 rounds (1 minute) by the best and fastest means available to it. If it can’t flee, it cowers. Unconscious: An unconscious creature is knocked out and helpless.  CONDITIONS  Entangled: An entangled creature is ensnared. Being entangled impedes movement, but doesn’t entirely prevent it unless the bonds are anchored to an immobile object or tethered by an opposing force. An entangled creature moves at half speed, can’t run or charge, and takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls and a –4 penalty to Dexterity. Casting a spell while entangled requires a Concentration check (DC 15 + the spell’s level). Exhausted: An exhausted creature can neither run nor charge, and it takes a –6 penalty to Strength and Dexterity. It can move at only half speed. After 1 hour of complete rest, an exhausted creature becomes fatigued. Fascinated: A fascinated creature is entranced by a magical effect. The creature stands or sits quietly, taking no actions other than to pay attention to the fascinating effect, for as long as that effect lasts. A fascinated creature takes a –4 penalty on skill checks made as reactions, such as Listen and Spot checks. Any potential threat, such as a hostile creature approaching, allows the fascinated creature a new saving throw against the fascinating effect. Any obvious threat, such as someone drawing a weapon, casting a spell, or aiming a ranged weapon at a fascinated creature, automatically breaks the effect. Another creature that uses a standard action to do so can free a fascinated creature from this condition. Fatigued: A fatigued creature can neither run nor charge and takes a –2 penalty to Strength and Dexterity. Doing anything that would normally cause fatigue causes a fatigued creature to become exhausted. After 8 hours of complete rest, a fatigued creature is no longer fatigued. Flat-Footed: A creature that hasn’t yet taken an action during combat is flat-footed, not yet able to react normally to the situation. A flat-footed creature is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC and can’t make attacks of opportunity. Frightened: See page 53. Grappling: A grappling creature is engaged in some form of hand-to-hand struggle with one or more attackers. Its actions are limited—see page 60. It doesn’t threaten any squares, and it’s denied its Dexterity bonus to AC against opponents it isn’t grappling. Helpless: A helpless creature is paralyzed, held, bound, sleeping, unconscious, or otherwise completely at an opponent’s mercy. It is treated as having a Dexterity of 0 (–5 modifier) and takes a –4 penalty to AC against melee attacks. A helpless creature is subject to attacks that rely on a target’s being denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. As a full-round action, an enemy can use a melee weapon to deliver a coup de grace to a helpless target. Immobilized: An immobilized creature can’t move out of the space it was in when it became immobilized. It otherwise functions normally unless it’s flying. Immobilized flying creatures that have the ability to hover can maintain their initial altitude. All other flying creatures subjected to this condition descend at a rate of 20 feet per round until they reach the ground, taking no falling damage. Incorporeal: See page 64. Invisible: See page 76. Knocked Down: Depending on their size, creatures can be knocked down by winds of high velocity. Creatures on the ground are knocked prone by the force of the wind. Flying creatures are instead blown back 1d6×10 feet. Nauseated: A nauseated creature is experiencing overwhelming physical discomfort. Nauseated creatures are unable to attack, cast spells, concentrate on spells, or do anything else requiring  35  Counterspelling Counterspelling is the active process of using one spell to negate the effect of another, usually during combat. It’s possible to cast any spell as a counterspell. By doing so, you’re using the spell’s energy to disrupt the casting of the same spell by another spellcaster. Counterspelling works even if one spell is divine and the other arcane.  COUNTERSPELLING  USING COUNTERSPELLING To use a counterspell, you must select an opponent as the target of the counterspell. You do this by choosing ready as your standard action. In doing so, you elect to wait to complete your action until your opponent tries to cast a spell. You can still take a move action of some sort, since ready is a standard action. If the target of your counter spell tries to cast a spell, make a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + the spell’s level). This check doesn’t require using an action. If the check succeeds, you correctly identify the spell and can attempt to counter it. If the check fails, you can’t do either of these tasks. To complete the process, you must then cast the correct spell. A spell can counter only another spell of the same name. If you’re able to cast such a spell and you have it prepared (if you prepare spells), you cast it, altering it slightly to create a counterspell effect. If the target is within range, both spells negate each other with no other results.  Counterspelling Metamagic Spells Metamagic feats aren’t taken into account when determining whether a spell can be countered.  Illus. by C. Frank  Specific Exceptions  36  Some spells counter each other, especially when they have diametrically opposed effects. A spell’s description tells whether that spell can be used to counter another spell.  Dispel Magic as a Counterspell You can use dispel magic to counterspell, and you don’t need to identify the spell the other spellcaster is casting. However, dispel magic doesn’t always work as a counterspell—see the spell description (PH 223).  SPELL DUELS Complete Arcane introduced a spell dueling system that takes advantage of counterspelling. Here’s how it works. Arcane spellcasters frequently come up against each other in the course of adventuring, but the chaos of the battlefield makes an accurate measure of skill impossible. For a true test of arcane ability, a single mage meets another mage in a ritual spell duel that observes ancient and honorable formalities. At its basic level, a spell duel is an agreement between two spellcasters to follow the format of the duel. No magic enforces compliance, and dishonorable spellcasters can and do break the rules. Once a challenge has been made and accepted, the two duelists must agree on a place and time for their encounter, as well as on whether the duel will be lethal or nonlethal. The choice of the dueling ground is traditionally the prerogative of the challenged party. On the day of the duel, both combatants follow specific procedures. 1. Neither party is permitted to be under the effect of any spell or any magic item until the time of the duel. 2. At the appointed hour, the presiding judge or official gives some sign that the duel has begun. Roll initiative. 3. First round: Each duelist casts any spell that can be cast so as to affect only himself. Most duelists use this round to prepare the best magical defense they can manage. 4. Second round: Each duelist readies an action, usually to counterspell in the following round. 5. Third round: Begin dueling. 6. The duel ends when one of the combatants yields, is knocked unconscious, or is otherwise rendered unable to continue. The duel is structured so that each participant is guaranteed an opportunity to prepare a defense and can get ready to counter an enemy’s first spell, regardless of who wins initiative. Of course, a duelist might not actually use a readied action to counterspell during the third round. The winner of initiative probably launches an attack instead. But the point is that neither duelist is finished by simply losing initiative—if you go second in a spell duel, you still have the opportunity to cast a defensive spell, and you have the opportunity to snuff out whatever spell your faster opponent tries first by using your readied counterspell. In some dueling traditions, the official declares mandatory pauses in the duel after every three attack spells exchanged, providing both combatants with an opportunity to tend to their defenses again or ready another action to counterspell.  The Living Game by Bill Slavicsek, Director of RPG R&D  INTERLUDE: THE LIVING GAME  D&D is a living game. It grows. It evolves. It changes every day it gets played. This concept is so important, so fundamental to the nature of D&D, that I’ve spoken about it at length at conventions year in and year out since the launch of 3rd Edition. This volume makes a great place to collect those thoughts and touch on the subject one more time—at least until the next time an opportunity presents itself to talk about it again. What do I mean by a living game? A living game has few, if any, boundaries. It has a structure, but that structure is designed to expand; it isn’t rigid and set. From the moment we “finished” the rules (and I use that term lightly), we began to see ways to add to the game, to improve the game, to take what we learned in the creation process and reexamine it as we played. Few other forms of entertainment have this built-in evolution mechanic, and it’s what makes D&D so vibrant and so exciting. And even more exciting, we (as the original creators) have only a minor stake in this evolution. Change, growth, and improvement really come from the tens of thousands of game groups playing the game. In other words, the catalyst for change is you! A board game can play differently each time you break it out of its box, depending on the strategies employed and the players involved, but by its nature, it can’t go beyond the confines of the game board, the play pieces, or the fundamental rules of the game. The same is true of computer games. For a computer game to evolve, it must be reprogrammed, and even minor updates require tons of work before the end user notices any change. RPGs, and D&D specifically, work at a whole other level. At its core, D&D is a very personalized game. Sure, we have a common set of rules to abide by. There have always been watershed adventures that a significant portion of us play through to create a shared experience. But otherwise, your D&D game is different from my D&D game. The choices that players make for their characters provide the first of these differentials. From class selection to feats to skills to ability scores, the mix of players and player characters make your game unique. Even if two separate groups had exactly identical player characters, just the fact that different people were playing those characters would make the two games radically different. To me, that’s exciting in a way that can’t be matched by any computer game. The Dungeon Master directly influences another significant difference through campaign setting choice, adventure selection, monster choices, and other elements related to story and setting. Even if we’re both playing in an EBERRON campaign, we could be in disparate parts of the world, following different plots and subplots, and tackling different villains and villainous organizations. More often, DMs build unique campaigns using material  from the official campaign settings that we publish, further widening the gap between experiences from one game group to another. So, these differences between games and game groups showcase one aspect of the living game. From the moment a DM or player picks up the core rulebooks and interacts with them, the D&D game begins to change. D&D isn’t a static game that lives only between the covers of its books. The books, with their rules and stories, provide structure and balance—but the game itself comes alive when DMs and players get together. The game lives and breathes as imaginations spark and dice roll. Whether you’re a pure roleplayer or a crunchy all-about-the-combat player, your interaction with the DM’s setting and the other players create a story and game that is uniquely your own. And it’s alive! Which leads to the other aspect of the living game: the rules themselves. Because we built D&D to expand, it is by necessity alive. Every new book we produce offers new options for game play that add to the fundamental structure of the game. New classes and prestige classes, new feats, new spells, new monsters, new settings, new organizations, new locations . . . you name it, we make it, and it all adds up to more choices to make your game exactly what you want it to be. But while the rules begin with us, they certainly don’t end within the walls of Wizards of the Coast. When books are published, the rules see play at a scale that no amount of playtesting can match. As the tens of thousands of game groups put the rules through their paces, stress fractures begin to appear. Let’s face it, some rules wind up being broken. But other times, better ideas begin to appear as rules for specific situations get applied. This is one of the most exciting and invigorating aspects of the living game—the game rules evolve as the game gets played. We gather feedback from a wide variety of sources. We watch the message boards (on our site and on other sites). We conduct surveys. We run focus groups. We sift through email and rules questions. And we play the game ourselves—because it’s work and because it’s also the hobby that we love. Through these venues, we update errata, clarify rules, and make the D&D game even better than it was. The process of evolution and continuous improvement has led to every new edition of the game, and it shows that the audience has as much influence on the way D&D develops as the designers, developers, and editors who work on it. Say it with me—D&D is a living game. It’s an exciting, vibrant, evolving, and constantly changing entertainment experience unparalleled by anything else out there, because the creators and audience jointly inspire this change. That’s powerful. That’s unique. And it’s really, really fun. At the end of the day, that’s what D&D is all about. Long live the living game! Long live D&D!  37  Cover One of the best defenses available is cover. By taking cover, you can protect yourself from attacks, especially ranged attacks, and also from being spotted.  DETERMINING COVER  COVER  To determine whether your target has cover from your ranged attack, choose a corner of your square. If any line from this corner to any corner of the target’s square passes through a square or border that blocks line of effect or provides cover, or through a square occupied by a creature, the target has cover. When you make a melee attack against an adjacent target, your target has cover if any line from your square to the target’s square intersects a wall, including a low wall. When making a melee attack against a target that isn’t adjacent to you (such as with a reach weapon), use the rules for determining cover from ranged attacks.  Big Creatures Any creature that has a space larger than 5 feet (1 square) determines cover against melee attacks slightly differently than smaller creatures do. Such a creature can choose any square that it occupies to determine if an opponent has cover against its melee attacks. Similarly, when making a melee attack against such a creature, you can pick any of the squares it occupies to determine if it has cover against you.  Illus. by T. Lockwood  Low Obstacles  38  A low obstacle, such as a wall no higher than half your height, provides cover, but only to creatures within 30 feet (6 squares) of it. An attacker who is closer to the obstacle than the target is can ignore the cover.  EFFECTS OF COVER Cover grants you a +4 bonus to AC, as well as a +2 bonus on Reflex saves against attacks that originate or burst out from a point on the other side of the cover from you. Spread effects extend around corners and thus negate this cover bonus (see Spread, page 134). The DM can impose other penalties or restrictions on attacks, depending on the details of the cover. For example, to strike effectively through a narrow opening, you need to use a long piercing weapon, such as an arrow or a spear. A battleaxe just isn’t going to get through an arrow slit.  Attacks of Opportunity You can’t make attacks of opportunity against an opponent with cover relative to you.  Hide Checks You can use cover to make a Hide check. Without cover, you usually need concealment to make a Hide check.  DIFFERENT FORMS OF COVER Cover can be better or worse than described in Effects of Cover. Other forms of cover are detailed here. Regardless, multiple forms of cover don’t stack—only the best form of cover applies.  Improved Cover In some cases, cover can provide a greater bonus to AC and Reflex saves. For instance, a creature peering around a corner or through an arrow slit has even better cover than a creature standing behind a low wall or an obstacle. In such situations, the DM can double the normal cover bonuses to AC and Reflex saves. A creature with this improved cover effectively  COVER  gains improved evasion against any attack to which the Reflex save bonus applies. Furthermore, improved cover provides a +10 bonus on Hide checks.  Limited Cover Some objects that don’t occupy a whole square, such as tree trunks and pillars, provide limited cover. If you’re standing in the same square as such an object, you gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class and a +1 bonus on Reflex saves. The presence of such an object doesn’t otherwise affect your fighting space, because you’re using the object to your advantage when you can.  Soft Cover Creatures, even your enemies, can provide you with cover against ranged attacks. However, such soft cover provides no bonus on Reflex saves, nor does soft cover allow you to make a Hide check.  Total Cover If you don’t have line of effect to your target, that target is considered to have total cover from you. You can’t make an attack against a target that has total cover. A spread might still affect a creature that has total cover, if the spread’s area allows the effect to cover the distance.     TAKING COVER The concept of cover adds realism to combat, allowing tactical choices that didn’t really exist in previous versions of D&D. As the 3e game evolved, we spent some time grappling with how cover should work. In the end, the 3.5 version of cover was much simpler than 3.0’s. Determining degrees of cover, as the 3.0 rules required, could be difficult and make combats last longer. In the end, we found the degree of cover didn’t make a substantial difference in most cases. In addition, when we began designing the D&D Miniatures Game, we had to streamline a number of rules to let skirmishes move quickly and efficiently. One of these rules was cover, which ended up being adopted in the 3.5 version of the D&D rules.  We moved the 3.0 rule of striking cover to an optional rule in the 3.5 Dungeon Master’s Guide. An AC bonus already existed for cover, and a penalty already existed for shooting into melee. Requiring the additional calculation was a timeconsuming way to penalize those who were inadvertently providing cover. Then came the issue of hard and soft cover. The 3.0 rules didn’t distinguish, which led to some unintended results, such as characters getting bonuses on Reflex saves by standing behind their allies. So 3.5 revised the rules to explicitly prevent such abuses. —Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, editor     39  Critical Hits A critical hit is an attack that deals more damage, indicating a hit to a vital area. Certain creatures are immune to extra damage from critical hits because they don’t have vital organs, points of weakness, or differentiation from one portion of the body to another.  DETERMINING A CRITICAL HIT CRITICAL HITS  When you make an attack roll and get a natural 20 (the d20 shows 20), you hit regardless of your target’s Armor Class, and you have scored a threat. The hit might be a critical hit (or “crit”). To find out if it is a critical hit, you immediately make a critical roll—another attack roll with all the same modifiers as the attack roll you just made.  If the critical roll also results in a hit against the target’s AC, your original hit is a critical hit. (The critical roll just needs to hit to give you a crit. It doesn’t need to come up 20 again.) If the critical roll is a miss, then your hit is just a regular hit.  Increased Threat Range Sometimes you can score a threat on a natural roll that is lower than 20. In such cases, you have an increased threat range. Longswords, for instance, give you a threat on a natural attack roll of 19 or 20 (the d20 shows 19 or 20). In such cases, a roll of lower than 20 isn’t an automatic hit. Any attack roll that doesn’t result in a hit isn’t a threat.  Spells and Critical Hits A spell that requires an attack roll can score a critical hit. A spell that requires no attack roll can’t score a critical hit even if it deals damage.  CRITICAL HIT RESULTS  Illus. by K. Walker  A critical hit means that you roll your damage more than once, with all your usual bonuses, and add the rolls together. Unless otherwise specified, the threat range for a critical hit on an attack roll is 20, and the multiplier is ×2.  Extra Damage Extra damage beyond a weapon’s normal damage, such as that dealt by precision damage abilities (see page 42) or the flaming property of a flaming sword, isn’t multiplied when you score a critical hit.  Increased Critical Multiplier Some weapons, such as battlea xes and arrows, deal more than double damage on a critical hit.  40  Damage Reduction  STACKING DAMAGE REDUCTION If a creature has damage reduction from more than one source, the two forms of damage reduction don’t stack. Instead, the creature gets the benefit of the best damage reduction that applies to a given situation.  OVERCOMING DAMAGE REDUCTION A DR entry denotes the amount of damage ignored (usually 5 to 15 points) followed by a slash and the type of damage, material, or magic that overcomes the DR. If a weapon or attack doesn’t have the indicated quality or qualities, that attack has its damage reduced by the number before the slash to a minimum of 0 points of damage. Possible ways to overcome damage reduction include the following.  Aligned Some damage reduction can be overcome by chaotic-, evil-, good-, or lawful-aligned weapons, indicated by an entry such as DR 5/lawful. Other than the inherent abilities of some magic weapons, an aligned weapon can be acquired through an align weapon spell or from an alignment subtype (see Aligned Strike, page 100). Damage reduction that can be overcome only by aligned weapons is supernatural. Ammunition fired from a projectile weapon that has an alignment gains the alignment of that projectile weapon, in addition to any alignment the ammunition already has.  Damage Type Bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing damage can overcome some damage reduction. A humble club, which deals bludgeoning damage, overcomes DR such as 5/bludgeoning. This kind of damage reduction is extraordinary.  Epic Weapons that have a magical enhancement bonus of +6 or higher can overcome epic damage reduction. An “epic weapon” isn’t enough. This type of damage reduction is supernatural. If a creature has this kind of damage reduction, such as DR 5/epic, it also has the epic strike ability (see page 100). Ammunition fired from a projectile weapon that has an enhancement bonus of +6 or higher can overcome epic damage reduction.  Magic When magic can overcome a creature’s damage reduction, a weapon that has a +1 or higher magical enhancement bonus is required. If a creature has this kind of damage reduction, such as DR 5/magic, it also has the magic strike ability (see page 101). This kind of damage reduction is supernatural. Ammunition fired from a projectile weapon that has an enhancement bonus of +1 or higher is treated as magic for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  DAMAGE REDUCTION  A creature that has damage reduction (DR) ignores some of the hit point damage from weapons, natural weapons, and unarmed attacks that don’t meet certain criteria. Wounds heal immediately, or the weapon bounces off harmlessly, and the attacker knows the attack was ineffective. Damage reduction doesn’t reduce the damage from energy attacks, spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities. Nor does it affect poisons or diseases delivered by inhalation, ingestion, or contact. Whenever damage reduction completely negates the damage from an attack, it also negates most special effects that accompany the attack, such as injury poison and injury disease. Attacks that deal no damage because of the target’s DR can’t distract a creature from concentrating.  Nothing When a DR entry has a dash after the slash, such as DR 5/—, no weapon can overcome it. Insurmountable damage reduction is extraordinary.  Special Material A special material, such as adamantine, alchemical silver, or cold iron, is required to overcome other forms of damage reduction. For example, potent fey have DR that can be overcome only by cold iron. Damage reduction that can be overcome only by adamantine is extraordinary; DR that can be overcome only by cold iron or alchemical silver is supernatural.  Special Situations A few kinds of damage reduction can be overcome by more than one factor. This kind of DR appears with the word “or” between qualities, such as DR 5/cold iron or good. A cold iron weapon or a good-aligned weapon can overcome such DR. Other forms of damage reduction can be overcome only by attacks that combine qualities. This kind of DR appears with the word “and” between qualities, such as DR 5/silver and good. A weapon that falls into one category but not the other is of no help in overcoming such damage reduction—the weapon must have all the indicated qualities to be effective. In these cases, the damage reduction is supernatural if any quality required to overcome it is considered part of a supernatural form of DR. Otherwise, the damage reduction is extraordinary.     EVOLUTION OF DR In prior editions of D&D, some monsters could only be hit by weapons with a certain magic bonus or better—anything less simply had no effect. It was a lot like a sign at an amusement park: “You must be at least this tall to fight this monster.” Damage reduction was a big improvement. It said you could hurt a monster with an inferior weapon, but you’d just do less damage. In practice, though, damage reduction values were so  high that it was very difficult to damage a monster without the right weapon. In the 3.5 revision, we made damage reduction more flavorful and easier to overcome. With a variety of methods to overcome DR, special materials and weapon types became more important. And we lowered damage reduction numbers so you have a hope of dealing damage even without the right weapon. —James Wyatt, designer     41  Damage Types Damage types include kinds of weapon damage and categories of energy damage, as well as special types of damage from specific sorts of attacks. Some monsters are resistant or immune to attacks from certain types of damage, while others are more vulnerable to certain types of damage. For these reasons, damage type can be important.  WEAPONS DAMAGE TYPES  Weapons and natural weapons are classified according to the type of damage they deal, which can be bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing.  ENERGY Abilities and effects that employ one of the five energy types deal energy damage, which can be acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic.  NEGATIVE AND POSITIVE Negative energy and positive energy are damage types, but they are not considered energy types the way that acid, cold, electricity, fire, and sonic are.  Illus. by D. Hudnut  PRECISION DAMAGE  42  A number of abilities in the game allow a creature to deal extra damage by striking a vital area. This category of abilities includes sneak attack and other abilities that work like it, such as a ninja’s sudden strike (Complete Adventurer 8) and scout’s skirmish (Complete Adventurer 12). For the sake of simplicity, the extra damage such abilities deal is referred to as precision damage. Several factors are important to keep in mind regarding this sort of damage.  • Precision damage applies on any attack that meets the requirements of the ability that grants the damage. This includes multiple attacks made during a full attack. If conditions somehow change between multiple attacks, attacks that not longer meet the ability’s requirements can’t deal precision damage. • An attacker can deal precision damage with any weapon he can wield, but he must wield that weapon in the optimal way. If an attacker takes the –4 penalty to deal nonlethal damage with a lethal weapon, for example, no precision damage is possible. • Ranged attacks can deal precision damage only if the range is 30 feet or less. • Precision damage applies only against living creatures that have discernible anatomies. Undead, constructs, deathless, oozes, plants, and incorporeal creatures are not subject to precision damage, and creatures that are not subject to critical hits are not subject to precision damage. • To deal precision damage, the attacker must see (or otherwise sense) the target accurately enough to pick out a vital spot. Any degree of concealment foils the ability to deal precision damage. • To deal precision damage, an attacker must be able to reach the target’s vital spots. If the attacker can’t do so, he can’t deal precision damage. • If the bonus damage from a precision damage ability is expressed as extra dice of damage, the damage from those dice is never multiplied when the attack receives a damage multiplier (such as from a critical hit). • A form of attack that enables an attacker to make multiple attacks during an action other than a full-round action, such as the Manyshot feat (standard action) or a quickened scorching ray (swift action), allows precision damage to be applied only to the first attack in the group.  Delay Delaying is useful if you need to see what others are going to do before deciding what to do yourself. The price you pay is the change in initiative count and lost time. You never get back the time you spend waiting to see what’s going to happen. While delaying, you can’t interrupt anyone else’s turn the way you can with a readied action.  DELAY  HOW TO DELAY By choosing to delay, you take no action on your regular turn, then act normally on whatever initiative count you decide. You voluntarily change your initiative count for the rest of the combat. You can specify this new initiative count, or you can just wait until a certain time and act then.  CONSEQUENCES OF DELAYING  Illus. by M. Cavotta  When you act, your initiative count changes to the one on which you acted. Your initiative count is lower for the rest of the combat if you acted later in the same round during which you decided to delay. If you take your delayed action in the round after the one during which you chose to delay, but before your original initiative count comes up, your initiative count rises to the one on which you acted for the rest of the combat. You don’t get the turn that would have occurred on your original initiative count.     THOSE WHO HESITATE, WIN Some say that battles are won or lost on initiative, but that’s not always true. Sometimes it’s best to keep your options open and choose your moment, rather than letting it choose you. Delay is a spellcaster’s best friend. You’ve won the initiative, but the bad guys are still milling around, scattered and unaware? Delay until they’ve noticed you and run into the perfect formation for your favorite area spell. Delay is a fighter’s best friend. Your every instinct might be screaming for you to rush into combat, but if you can just hold out long enough for your sorcerer’s fireball to soften up the foe or for your cleric’s bless to give you some extra oomph, your patience will pay off. Delay is a rogue’s best friend. Granted, it’s always better to get the drop on a flatfooted enemy . . . but when you can’t, delay until your fighter buddy engages a foe and sets up a flank. She’s scarier-looking than you are and presents a much  more threatening target to an enemy, at least until that sneak attack hits. Delay is a cleric’s best friend. Someone’s going to get hurt badly this round, but you don’t know who. Your attack options just aren’t going to cut it for this fight, and you know from past experience that keeping the barbarian or the wizard up and causing mass destruction is more effective than a smack or two from your mace. If you delay, you can be at a wounded or downed ally’s side, cast a healing spell, and have him up and fighting again without a wasted round in between. But the best thing about delay is the look on the DM’s face when he goes around the table asking for actions . . . and everyone except for you delays, waiting on your move. It’s your moment to set the tone for the battle, to take the definitive action that will carry your team to victory. You’re the star, and success rests on your action. Make it count! —Michele Carter, editor     43  Disable Device and Open Lock DISABLE DEVICE AND OPEN LOCK  Those with specialized training can disable or bypass certain protective mechanisms.  DISABLE DEVICE (INT; TRAINED ONLY)  Illus. by S. Belledin  If you have ranks in Disable Device, you can use this skill, along with appropriate tools, to disarm a trap, jam a lock, or tinker with the functioning of some other contraption. You can also rig simple devices, such as saddles or wagon wheels, to work normally for a while and then fail or fall off (usually after 1d4 rounds or minutes of use). The Disable Device check is made secretly, so that you don’t necessarily know whether you’ve succeeded. The DC depends on how tricky the device is. The following table details usual tasks, their DCs, and the time required to perform them. If the check succeeds, you disable the device. If it fails by 4 or less, you have failed but can try again. If it fails fail by 5 or more, something goes wrong. If the device is a trap, you spring it. If  you’re attempting some sort of sabotage, you think the device is disabled, but it still works normally. Those who have the trapfinding class feature and beat a trap’s DC by 10 or more can study a trap, figure out how it works, and bypass it (along with their companions) without disarming it. Such a character can also disarm magic traps.  Disable Device Difficulty Simple Tricky Difficult Wicked Magic trap1  Time 1 round 1d4 rounds 2d4 rounds 2d4 rounds 2d4 rounds  DC 10 15 20 25 25 + spell level  1 Requires the trapfinding class feature. Conditions DC Modifier Insert bypass element +10 Leave behind no trace of your tampering +5 No thieves’ tools +2 Reduce time to disable to 1 round +20  Difficulty A simple task includes jamming a lock, while a tricky one might be to sabotage a wagon wheel to fall off. Difficult and wicked devices are complex traps or clockwork machines. A magic trap can be a magic item, or it can be created by a spell according to that spell’s description.  Insert Bypass Element You try to incorporate a bypass element. If you succeed, you not only bypass a trap without disarming it, you also add a bypass element allowing you or your companions to avoid triggering the trap again later.  OPEN LOCK (DEX; TRAINED ONLY) If you have ranks in Open lock, you can use thieves’ tools to pick a lock as a full-round action.  Open Lock Lock Very simple lock Average lock Good lock Amazing lock Condition No thieves’ tools Open lock as a move action  DC 20 25 30 40 DC Modifier +2 +20     OPEN A LOCK, OR DISABLE IT? If you have the skill to disable traps of every imaginable variety, including magic traps, why can’t you understand how to disable a simple mechanical lock? The answer, of course, is legacy. The 2nd Edition of the game distinguished between the skills, and so 3rd Edition did as well. One possible solution is to ignore this and make Disable Device work on locks. An average lock is DC 25 to open. That means you have to invest a lot in the Open Lock skill to be effective. However, the  investment is likely to be moot when the barbarian bashes open all the locked doors. Just to rub salt in the wound, the wizard has a 2nd-level spell that opens locks regardless of the difficulty of picking them. When you can reliably open locks without taking 20, the party likely no longer needs you to do so. Have more fun by putting your skill points elsewhere, such as in Tumble. That way you can get out of the scrapes you’ll inevitably get into when the barbarian breaks open all those doors. —Matthew Sernett, designer     44  Disarm As a melee attack, you can attempt to disarm your opponent. If you’re attempting to disarm, follow the steps outlined here. Taking a held object that isn’t a melee weapon from an opponent requires the same sort of disarm attempt, as does grabbing an item the foe is wearing. You can’t use disarm against a natural weapon.  INITIATING A DISARM DISARM  When you attempt a disarm, you declare the item you’re trying to disarm, and you provoke an attack of opportunity from the defender—the creature you’re trying to disarm. If the defender’s attack of opportunity deals any damage, your disarm attempt fails. Otherwise, you and the defender make opposed melee attack rolls with your respective weapons or items. A wielder that is wielding a one-handed or two-handed weapon with two hands during a disarm attempt gets a +4 bonus on this attack roll, and the wielder of a light weapon takes a –4 penalty even if wielding that weapon with two hands. Unarmed strikes and natural weapons are considered light weapons, so you always take a penalty when trying to disarm an opponent while using one of these. If the combatants are of different sizes, the larger one receives a bonus on the attack roll of +4 per size category larger. If the targeted item isn’t a melee weapon, the defender takes a –4 penalty on the roll.  RESOLVING A DISARM  Grabbing Items You can use a disarm to snatch an item worn by the target. If you want to have the item in your hand, the disarm must be made as an unarmed attack. If the item is poorly secured or  otherwise easy to snatch or cut away, such as a loose cloak or a brooch pinned to the front of a tunic, you get a +4 bonus. Unlike on a normal disarm attempt, failing the attempt doesn’t allow the defender to attempt to disarm you. This otherwise functions identically to a disarm attempt. You can’t snatch an item that is well secured, such as a ring or bracelet, unless you have pinned its wearer. Even then, that defender gains a +4 bonus on the attack roll to resist the disarm attempt.  Illus. by S. Wood  If you beat the defender, the defender is disarmed. If you attempted the disarm while unarmed, whether you’re considered armed or not, you now have the weapon or item you targeted. The weapon is on the ground in the defender’s space if you used a weapon for your disarm attempt. If the defender wins and is considered armed with a melee weapon, that creature can immediately react and attempt to disarm you. This attempt doesn’t provoke an attack of opportunity from you. If the defender fails its disarm attempt, you don’t subsequently get a free disarm attempt against it.     TACTICAL DISARMING Disarming can seem like a bad tactic. First you make an attack that can’t deal damage, which the defender can negate with a roll. If you succeed, the weapon drops at its owner’s feet, and that foe can just pick the weapon up as a move action. Then he can attack you with it just fine. You probably get an attack of opportunity against the enemy when he picks up the weapon, but you could have just made a normal attack. Despite all this, disarming can be crippling when used in the right situation. • If the foe can make multiple attacks with the weapon, picking it up means he can’t make a full attack. • If you were unarmed when you disarmed the enemy, you can grab the weapon, thus preventing the foe from using it.  • If any of your allies are adjacent to the disarmed opponent, they each get an attack of opportunity when the foe retrieves the weapon. • If your adversary is using many melee weapons, you can use multiple attacks to get rid of a few weapons instead of one. Your opponent will have to use as many move actions to pick them all up, likely becoming less effective until he does. If you use any of these tactics, keep in mind that a creature that has natural weapons doesn’t become much less effective when relieved of manufactured weapons. Rendering a marilith weaponless is a great accomplishment, but she still has six potent slams and a tail attack. —Matthew Sernett, designer     45  Disease Adventurers explore dangerous and often filthy environments, where disease thrives or is carried by creatures. Although supernatural diseases exist, disease is usually an extraordinary effect.  Illus. by W. Mahy  DISEASE  DAMAGE FROM DISEASE When you’re exposed to a disease, you must make an immediate Fortitude saving throw against a DC specified in the disease;s description. If the save succeeds, you didn’t catch the disease, and it has no effect. If the save fails, you begin to take damage after an incubation period detailed in the disease’s description. Once per day afterward, you must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw to avoid the disease’s damage. Two successful saving throws in a row indicate that you have fought off the disease. You recover, taking no more damage. The DM can roll the initial Fortitude save for you, so that you don’t know whether you caught the disease.  DISEASE TYPES Diseases are divided into four types, according to the method by which their effect is delivered.  Contact Touching something containing this type of disease necessitates a saving throw. A weapon attack or a touch attack can also deliver it. (In this respect, a contact disease is the same as an injury disease.) Even if a creature has sufficient damage reduction to avoid taking any damage from the attack, the disease can still affect it.  Ingested Ingested disease must be consumed, usually as part of contaminated food or water. Most ingested diseases can also be inhaled.  Inhaled Inhaled diseases are airborne in an area. Holding one’s breath is ineffective against inhaled diseases; they affect the nasal membranes, tear ducts, and other parts of the body. Most inhaled diseases can also be ingested.  Injury This type of disease must be delivered through a wound, which can be as small as a fleabite. If a creature has sufficient damage reduction to avoid taking any damage from the attack, the disease doesn’t affect it.  TREATING DISEASE Use of the Heal skill can help a diseased creature. If a diseased creature is in a healer’s care and has spent the previous 8 hours resting, every time it makes a saving throw against disease effects, the healer makes a check. The diseased creature can use a higher Heal check result in place of its saving throw result. Creatures recover points lost to ability score damage at a rate of 1 per day per ability damaged, and this rule applies even while a disease progresses. A creature that has a disease might be able to withstand the malady without accumulating any damage.  DISEASE IMMUNITY Unless otherwise noted in its description, a creature can’t be infected by any disease it can pass on as a special attack. Other creatures can be immune to disease according to their description or type.     SPREADING THE DISEASE The disease rules can be tough to use—not because the rules themselves are difficult or complex, but because diseases don’t seem to have much effect on play. Bolstering Fortitude saves, resting, and using lesser restoration or remove disease spells make defeating the disease too easy. Some diseases, such as mummy rot, are more dangerous, but at the level you face them, you typically have the means to get rid of them easily.  If you want diseases to be more interesting in play, try making them all communicated by contact. If creatures risk infection simply by touching a victim, a disease can spread dangerously fast. Perhaps the disease doesn’t affect the PCs’ abilities any more than normal, but it will likely have greater roleplaying implications among the PCs and in their interactions with NPCs. —Matthew Sernett, designer     46  Encumbrance Encumbrance rules determine how much a creature can carry before slowing down. A creature can be encumbered by armor and encumbered by weight.  ENCUMBRANCE BY ARMOR  A creature can lift up to its maximum load over its head. A creature can lift up to double its maximum load off the ground. While lifting double its maximum load, a creature is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC and can move only 5 feet per round as a full-round action. A creature can push or drag along the ground as much as five times its maximum load. Favorable conditions, such as being on smooth ground or dragging a slick object, can double these numbers. Bad circumstances, such as being on broken ground or pushing an object that snags, can reduce them to half or lower.  Carrying Capacity  ENCUMBRANCE BY WEIGHT If you want to determine encumbrance by weight, total the weight of everything a creature is carrying and wearing. Compare this total to the creature’s Strength on the Carrying Capacity table to determine if the load is light, medium, or heavy. A light load doesn’t encumber. Medium and heavy loads affect maximum Dexterity bonus to AC, carry a check penalty that works like an armor check penalty, reduce speed, and affect running speed, as shown on the Carrying Loads table. The Reduced Speed table provides reduced speed figures for base speeds from 40 feet to 100 feet. A medium or heavy load also counts as medium or heavy armor for the purpose of abilities and skills that are restricted by armor. If a creature is wearing armor and carrying a load, use the worst figure for each category. Don’t stack the penalties.  SIZE, SHAPE, AND ENCUMBRANCE The figures on the Carrying Capacity table are for Medium bipedal creatures. A larger bipedal creature can carry more weight, depending on its size category, as follows: Large ×2, Huge ×4, Gargantuan ×8, Colossal ×16. A smaller creature can carry less weight, depending on its size category, as follows: Small ×3/4, Tiny ×1/2, Diminutive ×1/4, Fine ×1/8. Quadrupeds can carry heavier loads. Instead of the multipliers given above, multiply the value corresponding to the creature’s Strength score from the Carrying Capacity table by the appropriate modifier, as follows: Fine ×1/4, Diminutive ×1/2, Tiny ×3/4, Small ×1, Medium ×1-1/2, Large ×3, Huge ×6, Gargantuan ×12, Colossal ×24.  TREMENDOUS STRENGTH For Strength scores not shown on the Carrying Capacity table, find the Strength score between 20 and 29 that has the same number in the “ones” digit as the creature’s Strength score does. Multiply the figures by 4 if the creature’s Strength is in the 30s, 16 if it’s in the 40s, 64 if it’s in the 50s, and so on.  Str 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 +10  Light Load Medium Load Heavy Load up to 3 lb. 4–6 lb. 7–10 lb. up to 6 lb. 7–13 lb. 14–20 lb. up to 10 lb. 11–20 lb. 21–30 lb. up to 13 lb. 14–26 lb. 27–40 lb. up to 16 lb. 17–33 lb. 34–50 lb. up to 20 lb. 21–40 lb. 41–60 lb. up to 23 lb. 24–46 lb. 47–70 lb. up to 26 lb. 27–53 lb. 54–80 lb. up to 30 lb. 31–60 lb. 61–90 lb. up to 33 lb. 34–66 lb. 67–100 lb. up to 38 lb. 39–76 lb. 77–115 lb. up to 43 lb. 44–86 lb. 87–130 lb. up to 50 lb. 51–100 lb. 101–150 lb. up to 58 lb. 59–116 lb. 117–175 lb. up to 66 lb. 67–133 lb. 134–200 lb. up to 76 lb. 77–153 lb. 154–230 lb. up to 86 lb. 87–173 lb. 174–260 lb. up to 100 lb. 101–200 lb. 201–300 lb. up to 116 lb. 117–233 lb. 234–350 lb. up to 133 lb. 134–266 lb. 267–400 lb. up to 153 lb. 154–306 lb. 307–460 lb. up to 173 lb. 174–346 lb. 347–520 lb. up to 200 lb. 201–400 lb. 401–600 lb. up to 233 lb. 234–466 lb. 467–700 lb. up to 266 lb. 267–533 lb. 534–800 lb. up to 306 lb. 307–613 lb. 614–920 lb. up to 346 lb. 347–693 lb. 694–1,040 lb. up to 400 lb. 401–800 lb. 801–1,200 lb. up to 466 lb. 467–933 lb. 934–1,400 lb. —see Tremendous Strength—  ENCUMBRANCE  A creature’s armor defines, among other statistics, armor check penalty, overall speed, and running speed. Unless the creature is weak or carrying a lot of gear, that’s all you need to know. The extra gear doesn’t slow the creature down any more than the armor already does. If a creature is weak or carrying a lot of gear, however, you should calculate encumbrance by weight.  LIFTING AND DRAGGING  Carrying Loads Load Max Dex Check Penalty Medium +3 –3 Heavy +1 –6  –— Speed —– (30 ft.) (20 ft.) 20 ft. 15 ft. 20 ft. 15 ft.  Run ×4 ×3  Reduced Speed Base Speed 40 ft. 50 ft. 60 ft. 70 ft. 80 ft. 90 ft. 100 ft.  Reduced Speed 30 ft. 35 ft. 40 ft. 50 ft. 55 ft. 60 ft. 70 ft.  47  Energy Some effects use or create energy, dealing damage according to the type of energy used. Energy comes in five types: acid, cold, electricity, fire, and sonic. The types of energy help to determine whether certain creatures are more resistant or more vulnerable to the attack that uses the energy.  ENERGY  IMMUNITY TO ENERGY A creature that has immunity to energy is never harmed by that energy. A creature that is immune to fire usually has vulnerability to cold—see Vulnerability to Energy. Creatures that are immune to cold typically have vulnerability to fire.  RESISTANCE TO ENERGY A creature that has resistance to energy has the ability (usually extraordinary) to ignore some damage of a certain energy type each time it takes damage of that type. Each resistance is defined by what energy type it resists and how many points of damage are resisted. For instance, if a creature has resistance to fire 10, it can ignore the first 10 points of fire damage it takes from each attack. The source of the damage, mundane or magical, doesn’t matter. When resistance completely negates the damage from an energy attack, that attack can’t force a Concentration check. Multiple sources of resistance to a certain energy type don’t stack with each other. Only the highest value applies to any given attack.  VULNERABILITY TO ENERGY Some creatures have vulnerability to a certain type of energy. Such a creature takes half again as much (+50%) damage as normal from effects that employ that energy, regardless of whether a saving throw is allowed, or if the save is a success or failure.  SPECIAL SITUATIONS Some forms of energy can have other effects.  The fumes from most acids are inhaled poisons. Those who come close enough to a large body of acid to dunk a creature in it are exposed to the fumes. Such creatures must succeed on a DC 13 Fortitude save or take 1 point of Constitution damage. If the first save fails, the creature must succeed on a second save 1 minute later or take another 1d4 points of Constitution damage. Creatures immune to acid might still drown in it (see Suffocation, page 141) if they’re totally immersed.  Catching on Fire Those at risk of catching fi re are allowed a DC 15 Reflex save to avoid this fate. If a creature catches on fire, it takes 1d6 points of fire damage immediately. In each subsequent round, the burning creature must make another Reflex saving throw. Failure means it takes another 1d6 points of fire damage in that round. Success means the fire has gone out and deals no more damage. A creature that is on fire can extinguish the flames by jumping into enough water to soak itself. If no body of water is at hand, rolling on the ground or smothering the fire grants another save with a +4 bonus. Those unlucky enough to have their clothes or equipment catch fire must make a DC 15 Reflex save for each item. On a failed save, the item takes the same amount of damage as a burning creature does.  Sonic Attacks Unless otherwise noted, a sonic attack follows the rules for spreads (see page 134). The range of the spread is measured from the creature using the sonic attack. Not all sonic attacks deal damage, and many have effects based on whether they’re heard by a creature. Once a sonic attack has taken effect, deafening the subject or stopping its ears doesn’t end the effect. Stopping one’s ears ahead of time allows one to avoid having to make saving throws against mind-affecting sonic attacks, but not other kinds of sonic attacks, such as those that deal damage. Stopping one’s ears is a full-round action, and doing so requires wax or other soundproof material to stuff into the ears.  Acid Effects Corrosive acid deals 1d6 points of damage per round of exposure. Total immersion in acid deals 10d6 points of damage per round.     ACID ENERGY? Why is acid an energy type? Well . . . look over there! A monkey! Seriously, although acid isn’t what you’d normally consider energy from a scientific standpoint, it behaves in the game very much like fire, cold, sonic, and electricity. Creatures, spells, and magic items deal acid damage. Creatures have acid resistance and immunity. Spells grant acid resistance just like they grant fire resistance. As you can see, acid behaves much more like those other damage types than like weapon  damage types. Nothing in the game has resistance to bludgeoning damage—instead, some creatures have damage reduction against bludgeoning attacks. When talking about damage types, we wanted a way to refer to all the damage types that behave in a similar manner. That way we could group them conceptually and allow players to pick from them interchangeably (such as when casting the resist energy spell). “Energy” was the best word for that group. —Matthew Sernett, designer     48  Energy Drain and Level Loss Some creatures, especially undead, possess the supernatural  EFFECTS OF ENERGY DRAIN Each successful energy drain attack bestows one or more negative levels on the victim. The energy draining creature gains 5 temporary hit points for each negative level it bestows unless the negative level is caused by a spell or similar effect. The victim takes the following penalties for each negative level it gains.  RECOVERING FROM ENERGY DRAIN Negative levels remain for 24 hours or until removed with magic. After 24 hours, the victim must attempt a Fortitude save for each negative level gained. The DC is usually provided in the energy draining creature’s description, and that DC is typically equal to 10 + 1/2 the energy draining creature’s HD + its Cha modifier. If the source of the energy drain isn’t a creature, the save DC to remove the negative level is the same as the initial save DC to avoid the energy drain. If a saving throw succeeds, the associated negative level goes away without further effect. If the save fails, the negative level goes away, but the victim loses one level or Hit Die.  LEVEL LOSS A victim who loses a level loses the most recent level gained, losing one Hit Die along with a number of hit points equal to the average result of that die. The victim’s experience point total is set to the midpoint of the previous level. Base attack bonus, base saving throw bonuses, and class features are reduced to match the new level. As applicable, the victim loses any ability score increase, skill ranks, and feats associated with the lost level. If the exact ability score increased is unknown, remove 1 point from the highest ability score. If the skill ranks gained are unknown, remove ranks from the skills that have the most ranks. If the most recent feats gained are unknown, the victim chooses which ones to remove. A familiar or companion creature that has abilities tied to level has its abilities adjusted to fit its master’s new level.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  • –1 penalty on skill checks and ability checks. • –1 penalty on attack rolls and saving throws. • A loss of 5 hit points. • –1 effective level: Whenever the victim’s level is used in a roll or calculation, reduce it by one for each negative level. • Spellcasters lose access to one spell as if they had cast their highest-level, currently available spell. A victim that has more than one spell at the highest level can choose which spell is lost. In addition, a victim has one less spell slot of the highest available level when next preparing spells or regaining spell slots.  A creature that has negative levels equal to its current level or Hit Dice is instantly slain. A creature slain by energy drain in this way might rise as an undead of the same type as the energy draining creature. Such an occurrence is detailed in the energy draining creature’s description. If this isn’t the case, a creature slain by energy drain rises as a wight (if it can).  ENERGY DRAIN AND LEVEL LOSS  ability to drain living creatures (any creature not of the construct, deathless, or undead type) they strike. The creature making an energy drain attack draws away a portion of its victim’s life force. Most energy drain attacks require a successful melee attack roll. Mere physical contact isn’t enough. A creature can make unarmed and natural weapon attacks against energy draining creatures without risking loss of life energy.  Death Due to Energy Drain     WHAT’S THAT SUCKING SOUND? Level loss is the worst thing that can happen to a D&D character. I would rather see my character killed and eaten by a tojanida than strip him of hard-earned XP and force him to walk a step behind the rest of the party in power level—a fate that will likely result in death anyway. In previous editions of the game, energy drain was a total screw because the player wasn’t even allowed a save, and the  effect was instantaneous. Fortunately, 3rd Edition designers had the wisdom to impose a set of combat penalties associated with energy drain that could be negated by magic or a save before the effects became permanent, and they also added a safeguard (the restoration spell). Still, the D&D game is at its worst when you have to knock your character down a peg. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     49  ESCAPE ARTIST AND USE ROPE  Escape Artist and Use Rope You utilize Use Rope to bind an opponent, and you use Escape Artist to free yourself of similar bonds. But these closely related skills have other uses as well.  ESCAPE ARTIST  USE ROPE (DEX) With this skill, you can make firm knots and bind prisoners with ropes. The DCs for various tasks utilizing this skill are summarized on the following table. Tying a knot, tying a special knot, or tying a rope around yourself one-handed is a full-round action that provokes attacks of opportunity. Splicing two ropes together takes 5 minutes.  (DEX; ARMOR CHECK PENALTY) Use this skill to slip out of bonds or manacles, wriggle through tight spaces, or escape the grip of a monster that grapples you. The following table gives the DCs to escape various forms of restraints. Making an Escape Artist check to escape from rope bindings, manacles, or other restraints (except a grappler) requires 1 minute of work. Escaping from a net or an entangling spell is a full-round action. Escaping from a grapple or pin is a standard action. Using Escape Artist to get through a narrow space (one less than half as wide as your space) takes 1 minute for each 5 feet. You can usually try again by taking more time when using Escape Artist in any way.  Use Rope Task Bind a creature Secure a grappling hook1 Splice two ropes together Tie a firm knot Tie a rope around yourself one-handed Tie a special knot Condition Quickly tie2  DC Varies 10 15 10 15 15 Check Modifier –10  1 +2 for every 10 feet the hook is thrown (max DC 20). 2 Tie a knot or a rope around yourself one-handed as a move action rather than a full-round action.  Escape Artist Restraint Grappler Manacles Masterwork manacles Net or entangling spell Ropes Narrow space  DC Grappler’s grapple check result 30 35 20 Binder’s Use Rope check result +10 30  Condition Quick escape  DC Modifier +10  Entangling Spell Entangling spells include animate rope and entangle, among others. A spell’s descriptive text always takes precedence over the DC described here.  Quick Escape Quickly escaping from rope bindings, manacles, or other restraints (except a grappler) takes only 5 rounds of work. Escaping from a net or an entangling spell with the quick escape option is a standard action. Escaping from a grapple or pin with the quick escape option is a move action. Squeezing through a tight space takes half the time that it normally would.  Bind a Creature When you bind another creature using a rope, any Escape Artist check that the bound creature makes is opposed by your Use Rope check. You get a +10 bonus on this check because it’s easier to bind someone than to escape from bonds. If the creature tries to burst the rope rather than escape, use the rope’s break DC (normally 23) instead of DC 10. Binding a creature takes 1 minute.  Secure a Grappling Hook Securing a grappling hook requires a Use Rope check (DC 10, +2 for every 10 feet of distance the grappling hook is thrown, to a maximum DC of 20 at 50 feet or more). Failure by 4 or less indicates that the hook fails to catch and falls, allowing you to try again. Failure by 5 or more indicates that the grappling hook initially holds, but comes loose after 1d4 rounds of supporting weight. This check is made secretly, so that you don’t know whether the rope will hold your weight. Throwing a grappling hook is a standard action that provokes attacks of opportunity.  Special Knots A special knot performs in some special way after it’s tied, such as one that slips or loosens with a tug.     DON’T HANG YOURSELF WITH IT Use Rope checks are really annoying to fail. Failing a Use Rope check means falling (maybe to your death) or having an enemy escape (also maybe to your death). Yet they come up rarely enough that it’s hard to justify buying ranks. My house rules for Use Rope work as follows. Don’t. Yes, you secured the grappling hook, and it holds your weight. Yes, you tie up your enemy, and the bonds are secure.  The reason I do this is because making these checks isn’t any fun outside combat, and it always ends up with the PCs overthinking the problem and taking more time than they need to make sure they succeed. I still require Use Rope checks for trying to do this stuff in combat, and PCs still get to use Escape Artist if their enemies have bound them. —Logan Bonner, editor     50  Etherealness Certain creatures can or do exist on the Ethereal Plane. While on the Ethereal Plane, a creature is called ethereal. Unlike incorporeal creatures, ethereal creatures aren’t present on the Material Plane.  TRAITS  See invisibility and true seeing reveal ethereal creatures. Even if a creature on the Material Plane can see an ethereal creature, the ethereal creature is on another plane.  HARMING A force effect originating on the Material Plane extends onto the Ethereal Plane, so that a wall of force blocks an ethereal creature, and a magic missile can strike one, provided the spellcaster can see the ethereal target. Gaze attacks and abjurations also extend from the Material Plane to the Ethereal Plane. None of these effects extend from the Ethereal Plane to the Material Plane.  ETHEREALNESS  Ethereal creatures are invisible, inaudible, insubstantial, and scentless to creatures on the Material Plane. Most magical attacks have no effect on them. An ethereal creature can see and hear into the Material Plane in a 60-foot radius, though material objects block sight and sound as they would for a creature on the Material Plane. An ethereal creature inside an object on the Material Plane can’t see. Creatures and objects on the Material Plane look gray, indistinct, and ghostly to a creature on the Ethereal Plane. An ethereal creature can’t affect the Material Plane, not even magically. An ethereal creature, however, interacts with other ethereal creatures and objects the way material creatures interact with material creatures and objects.  SENSING  ENVIRONMENT Ethereal creatures move in any direction (including up or down) at will. They don’t need to walk on the ground, and material objects don’t block them. They pass through and operate in water as easily as air. Ethereal creatures can’t fall or take falling damage.  Ghosts Ghosts have a power called manifestation that allows them to appear on the Material Plane as incorporeal creatures. Still, they’re on the Ethereal Plane, and another ethereal creature can interact normally with a manifesting ghost.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  51  Falling  YIELDING SURFACES  One of the most common hazards to adventurers is a fall from a great height. Another potential hazard is to have an object fall on them.  FALLING DAMAGE  WATER Falls into water or similar liquids are handled differently. If the water is at least 10 feet deep, the fi rst 20 feet of falling deal no damage. The next 20 feet deal nonlethal damage (1d3 per 10-foot increment). Beyond that, a fall into water deals 1d6 points of lethal damage per 10 feet. Creatures that deliberately dive into water take no damage on a successful DC 15 Swim check or DC 15 Tumble check, as long as the water is at least 10 feet deep for every 30 feet fallen. However, the DC of the check increases by 5 for every 50 feet of the dive.  FALLING OBJECTS Just as creatures take damage when they fall more than 10 feet, so too do they take damage when falling objects hit them. Falling objects deal damage based on their weight and the distance they have fallen. For each 200 pounds of an object’s weight, the object deals 1d6 points of damage, provided it falls at least 10 feet, adding an additional 1d6 points of damage for every 10-foot increment it falls beyond the first. Objects lighter than 200 pounds also deal damage when dropped, but they must fall farther to deal the same damage. Use the following table to see how far an object of a given weight must drop to deal 1d6 points of damage. This is also the increment at which the object deals an additional 1d6 points of damage. A falling object can deal a maximum of 20d6 points of damage. Objects weighing less than 1 pound don’t deal damage to those they land upon, no matter how far they have fallen.  Illus. by C. Frank  FALLING  A creature that falls takes 1d6 points of damage per 10 feet fallen, to a maximum of 20d6. If a creature deliberately jumps instead of merely falling, the fi rst 1d6 is nonlethal damage. A DC 15 Jump check or DC 15 Tumble check allows a creature to avoid any damage from the first 10 feet fallen and converts any damage from the second 10 feet to nonlethal damage. You can instead try to use Tumble to ignore falling damage. For every 15 points of your Tumble check result, you can treat a fall as if it were 10 feet shorter than it really is when determining damage.  Falls onto yielding surfaces also treat the first 1d6 of damage as nonlethal damage. This reduction is cumulative with reduced damage due to deliberate jumps and skill use.  Damage from Falling Objects Object Weight 101–199 lb. 51–100 lb. 31–50 lb. 11–30 lb. 6–10 lb. 1–5 lb.  Falling Distance 20 ft. 30 ft. 40 ft. 50 ft. 60 ft. 70 ft.     DANGEROUS FALLS Falling in D&D has always been a simplified business. The maximum of 20d6 points of damage goes back to the earliest edition of the game. The 3e rules allow Tumble and Jump checks to negate some damage, and make the first 10 feet deal nonlethal damage for deliberate jumps, but the rule has essentially remained the same for 30 or more years. Players have a tendency to metagame this limitation, deliberately having their characters hurl themselves from great heights to save time, confident that they’ll survive the fall.  My husband, Chris, developed a rather complex system for falling, in which the d6 rolls don’t represent absolute damage but a proportion of total hit points. A result of 6 requires a reroll for the possibility of a broken bone. Modifiers apply for special circumstances, such as landing on a soft or sloping surface (reducing damage), landing on a jagged surface (increasing damage), or falling into water. DM discretion might adjust these guidelines. This house rule requires more calculation but does put the fear of heights back into the game: A 15th-level fighter and a 1st-level commoner have the same chance to be hurt by a great fall. —Jennifer Clarke Wilkes, editor     52  Fear Spells, magic items, and monsters can cause fear. In most cases, a Will saving throw is required to resist the effect. Fear attacks can have various consequences, but all of them are mind-affecting fear effects.  STAGES OF FEAR Fear has stages—shaken, frightened, panicked, and cowering.  Shaken  FEAR ATTACKS When they’re not spells, fear attacks can be extraordinary, supernatural, or spell-like, with specifics explained in the ability’s description.  FEAR  Shaken creatures take a –2 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks.  instead. A frightened creature that is made shaken or frightened becomes panicked instead. Multiple exposures to the same effect don’t trigger this escalation of fear. Exposure to different effects does. When such multiple exposures occur, the worst stage of fear lasts until the duration of all the effects causing the fear expire.  Fear Aura Frightened Frightened creatures take penalties as if shaken, and they flee from the source of their fear as quickly as they can. They can choose the path of their flight. Frightened creatures can use special abilities, including spells, to flee; indeed, a frightened creature must use such means if they are the only way to escape. Other than these stipulations, once frightened creatures can’t sense the source of their fear, they can act as they want. However, if the duration of their fear continues, creatures can be forced to flee once more if the source of their fear presents itself again. Frightened creatures that are unable to flee can fight.  Panicked  Frightful Presence Frightful presence is an extraordinary ability that makes a creature’s presence unsettling to foes. It takes effect when the creature performs some sort of dramatic act. Opponents within range who witness the act might become shaken or worse. This ability affects only those opponents that have fewer Hit Dice than the creature has. An opponent can resist the effect with a successful Will save (the DC usually equals 10 + 1/2 the creature’s HD + its Cha modifier). An opponent that succeeds on the save is immune to that same creature’s frightful presence for 24 hours.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  Panicked creatures take penalties as if shaken, and they flee from the source of their fear as quickly as they can. Their path is random. They flee from all other dangers that confront them rather than facing those dangers. Panicked creatures cower if they’re prevented from fleeing.  The use of a fear aura, which is a supernatural ability, is a free action. A fear aura is an area effect.  Cowering Cowering creatures are frozen in fear and can take no actions. A cowering creature takes a –2 penalty to AC and loses its Dexterity bonus (in all applications).  ESCALATING FEAR Fear effects are cumulative. A shaken creature that is made shaken again becomes frightened instead, and a shaken creature that is made frightened becomes panicked     FRIGHTENED WITHOUT FLEEING Once a creature becomes frightened, it runs away, so its usefulness in an encounter becomes extraordinarily limited. In a campaign where fear is common, a variant frightened condition can be more appropriate. With this variant, a creature that is frightened is not forced to flee from the source of its fear. Instead, this condition  imposes a –4 penalty on its attack rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks. A frightened creature subjected to another fear effect (but not the same effect) becomes panicked instead. —James Wyatt, designer     53  Feint You can try to mislead an opponent in melee combat, making it so that foe can’t dodge your next attack effectively.  INITIATING A FEINT To feint, make a Bluff check as a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Your target makes a Sense Motive check, adding its base attack bonus to the check.  Feinting Against Nonhumanoids  FEINT  You take a –4 penalty when feinting in this way against a nonhumanoid, because it’s harder to read a strange creature’s body language. Against a creature of animal Intelligence (1 or 2), you take a –8 penalty. Against a nonintelligent creature, feinting is impossible.  Illus. by J. Jarvis  FEINT RESULTS If your Bluff check result exceeds your target’s Sense Motive check result, your target is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC against the next melee attack you make against it. This attack must be made on or before your next turn, or else your foe recovers from the feint and takes no further disadvantage from it.     LOTUS FEINT One of the characters I played was Lotus Blossom, a former geisha/spy who took up life as an adventurer (mostly rogue and swashbuckler levels). The adventuring party’s tactics usually led to us being very spread out, and Lotus Blossom couldn’t always count on a flank to enable her to take advantage of her sneak attack ability. Always very self-sufficient, Lotus Blossom mastered the art of the feint. Investing lots of ranks in Bluff, as well as having Combat Expertise and Improved Feint, made her quite the combat force. In one battle, she and another rogue were tag-teaming an enemy fighter. Wounded from many sneak attacks from the  pair of us, he maneuvered onto favorable terrain, preventing us from giving each other a flank. The enemy cleric headed over to help her fighter ally and would’ve gotten there in another round. Confident of holding out against two mere rogues, now that they could no longer sneak attack, the fighter brandished his weapon. Lotus Blossom chose her moment, successfully feinted, and followed up with a devastating attack. Seeing her disemboweled fighter ally and two rogues turning toward her, the enemy cleric quickly surrendered. —Gwendolyn F. M. Kestrel, designer     54  attention to defense rather than offense. Doing so is called fighting defensively. You can instead devote yourself entirely to defending yourself with total defense.  the round. You can’t combine total defense with fighting defensively or with the benefit of the Combat Expertise feat, since using either of these tactics requires you to declare an attack or full attack. You can’t make attacks of opportunity while using total defense. If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you gain a +6 dodge bonus to AC when using total defense.  FIGHTING DEFENSIVELY AND TOTAL DEFENSE  Fighting Defensively and Total Defense When attacking, you can choose to devote more of your FIGHTING DEFENSIVELY You can choose to fight defensively when attacking as a standard action or a full-round action. If you do so, you take a –4 penalty on attack rolls until your next turn to gain a +2 dodge bonus to AC during the same time. This bonus stacks with the AC bonus granted by the Combat Expertise feat. If you have 5 or more ranks in Tumble, you gain a +3 dodge bonus to AC when fighting defensively.  Illus. by C. Frank  TOTAL DEFENSE You can simply defend your self as a standard action. You get a +4 dodge bonus to your AC for 1 round. Your AC improves at the start of this action, so it helps you against any attacks of opportunity you provoke during     DUCK AND WEAVE The fighting defensively and total defense actions don’t get premium space in the core rulebooks, and most players are quick to forget them entirely. That’s too bad, because they’re great options for a character when (a) he’s losing hit points at an uncomfortable rate and (b) he can’t extricate himself from the unpleasant combat situation easily. These actions aren’t as sexy as taking a full attack action or casting an empowered spell, but I can recall at least one rogue in my campaign thanking his lucky stars for total defense when his Armor Class soared from 21 to 27! If your character can’t hit worth a damn and routinely finds herself in the thick of things, consider writing the phrases “fight defensively” and “total defense” somewhere on page 1 of her character sheet. These words could save your character’s life. Rogues and clerics are especially prone to landing in such  predicaments—the rogue because of her propensity for sneak attacks and the cleric because of an occasional need to fill the fighter’s really big shoes. As an aside, I was a regular player in Monte Cook’s campaign, and my urban ranger had neither the best attack bonus nor the best Armor Class in the party, by far. On more than one occasion, when Diethan was on the ropes, I would make him take the total defense action while inciting his enemies to attack him mercilessly. This act won nods of approval from my fellow players, who were either struck by my canny ploy to keep Diethan alive or appreciated my ability to couch Diethan’s mounting desperation in the tender bosom of a half-remembered rule. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     55  Flanking  FLANKING  When making a melee attack, you get a +2 flanking bonus if your opponent is threatened by an ally on the opponent’s opposite border or opposite corner. Only a creature that threatens your foe can help you gain a flanking bonus. When in doubt about whether two allies flank an opponent, trace an imaginary line between the centers of the allies’ spaces. If the line passes through opposite borders of the opponent’s space, including corners of those borders, then the opponent is flanked.  BIG AND LITTLE CREATURES  Illus. by J. Ryman  If a flanker has a space larger than 1 square, it gets the flanking bonus if any square it occupies counts for flanking. Creatures that have a reach of 0 feet can’t flank an opponent, because they don’t threaten the squares around their own.     HOW WE LEARNED TO FLANK In the flagging days of D&D’s 2nd Edition, while 3rd Edition was being feverishly designed and tested, I and others were relegated to a back conference room at Wizards, tapped to create a D&D-themed board game. The board game drew on the nascent 3e rules, and thus included wizards, rogues, fighters, clerics, guardian monsters, and treasures to be won. Because we were using unformed rules as the basis for our game, and because we wanted a simplified version of those rules, we felt free to do anything we wanted. The game’s main innovation was that it needed no Dungeon Master. To play our board game, no one would be required to take on the herculean task of mastering all the rules before considering actually playing. Randomly generated quests, tiles, and monsters could stand in for the normally vital roles of storyteller, judge, and facilitator wrapped into a single body.  Because our game was to be a board game, we felt we might just be able to get away with our conceit that such a thing as DM-less gaming was possible. In any event, each player had a piece representing a character and tracked that piece on a grid, just as in D&D. We had a lot of fun running through dozens of iterations and simplifications of fledgling 3e rules for our board game. When we got to the rogue, we wondered how to make it obvious, in a DM-less environment, when the rogue should be able to sneak attack. Someone on our team slowly moved the rogue’s figure so a foe stood directly between the rogue and one of the rogue’s allies, and said, “How about whenever that happens?” Thus the concept of flanking was born. —Bruce R. Cordell, designer     56  FLANKING  57  Gaseous Form Some creatures have the supernatural or spell-like ability to take the form of a cloud of vapor. The spell gaseous form provides the same benefits.  TRAITS  GASEOUS FORM  Creatures that take on gaseous form becomes insubstantial, misty, and translucent along with all their gear (see Equipment, below). They can’t run but can fly, with perfect maneuverability, at a speed indicated in the ability’s description. A creature in gaseous form can move about and do anything a cloud of gas can conceivably do, such as flow through a crack under a door. It can’t, however, pass through solid matter.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  HARMING Creatures in gaseous form have damage reduction 10/ magic, as well as immunity to critical hits and poison. They don’t need to breathe and are immune to attacks involving breathing. Other spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities affect them normally.  ATTACKS While in gaseous form, creatures can’t attack physically or cast spells that have verbal, somatic, material, or focus components. They lose their supernatural abilities, except for the supernatural ability to leave and reassume gaseous form. If a creature is holding a charge on a touch spell and takes gaseous form, the touch spell discharges harmlessly.  SENSING Discerning a creature in gaseous form from natural mist requires a DC 15 Spot check. Creatures in gaseous form gain a +20 bonus on Hide checks in an area that contains mist, smoke, or other translucent gas.  EQUIPMENT While in gaseous form, creatures lose the benefit of armor, shields, and natural armor, including such bonuses granted or enhanced by magic items. Size modifier, Dexterity modifier, deflection bonus, dodge bonuses, and AC bonuses from force effects (such as from bracers of armor or the shield spell) still apply. Creatures in gaseous form can’t activate magic items. Continuously functioning items remain active unless those items provide one of the aforementioned useless bonuses to AC or are otherwise rendered moot by the gaseous form (such as a magic weapon).  ENVIRONMENT Creatures in gaseous form can’t enter water or other liquid. Winds and moving air affect creatures in gaseous form to the extent that the wind pushes such creatures in the direction the wind is moving. However, even the strongest wind can’t disperse or damage a creature in gaseous form.     VAMPIRE SHTICK A vampire can take gaseous form as a standard action. While in this version of gaseous form, the vampire can take damage. Gaseous form prevents a creature from using supernatural abilities, so the vampire loses traits such as DR 10/magic and silver. But gaseous form provides all its normal benefits, and fast healing is an extraordinary ability. If a vampire is reduced to 0 hit points, it automatically takes gaseous form. While in this version of gaseous form, it can’t take damage—it’s undead and has no hit points remaining.  A vampire can even enter this version of gaseous form while already in the other, assuming it’s dropped to 0 hit points. On the upside, a vampire forced into gaseous form in this way then has to go to its coffin and lie there, waiting an hour for you to stake it. Why so complicated? Both aspects of the vampire’s ability were designed to mimic elements of Bram Stoker’s Dracula— the ability to float about as “motes of dust” and the need to rest in a coffin. —Matthew Sernett, designer     58  Gaze Attacks Gaze attacks can charm, damage, petrify, or even kill. Those  IMMUNITY Blind creatures are immune to gaze attacks unless the attack’s description says otherwise. A gazing creature is immune to the gaze attacks of others of its kind.  PASSIVE GAZE ATTACKS  Averting Eyes Allies of a creature that has a gaze attack might be affected, but they’re all considered to be averting their eyes. Each round, a creature that is averting its eyes has a 50% chance of not needing to make a saving throw. An opponent can avert its eyes from the  An opponent can shut its eyes, turn its back on the gazing creature, or wear a blindfold. In these cases, the opponent doesn’t need to make a saving throw. The gazing creature gains total concealment relative to such an opponent.  Environmental Factors If limited visibility results in concealment, a percentage chance equal to the normal miss chance exists that a creature doesn’t need to make a saving throw against the gaze attack during a given round. This chance isn’t cumulative with averting the eyes. It’s rolled separately. If complete darkness pervades an area, creatures that have darkvision are affected by gaze attacks normally.  ACTIVE GAZE ATTACKS A gazing creature can actively use its gaze as a standard action. The creature simply chooses a target that it has line of sight to and is within range, and that opponent must attempt a saving throw. If the target has chosen to defend against the gaze as discussed earlier, the opponent has a chance to avoid needing to attempt the saving throw. If a gazing creature uses its gaze in this way, it’s possible for a foe to need to save twice during the same round— once before its turn and once at the beginning of its turn.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  Each creature within range of a gaze attack must attempt a saving throw, which can be a Fortitude save or a Will save, each round at the beginning of its turn. The DC usually equals 10 + 1/2 the gazing creature’s HD + its Cha modifier. A potentially affected creature can avert or cover its eyes to gain a better chance to be unaffected by the gaze attack. Just looking at a gazing creature’s image, such as in a mirror, doesn’t subject the viewer to a gaze attack.  Covering Eyes  GAZE ATTACKS  gaze attacks not produced by a spell or spell-like ability are supernatural. Unless specified otherwise, a creature that has a gaze attack (a gazing creature) can suppress the attack at will without using an action to do so. The gazing creature can also veil its eyes, negating its gaze attack. Gaze attacks can affect ethereal opponents. Invisible creatures can’t use gaze attacks.  gazing creature’s face while at the same time looking at the creature’s body, watching its shadow, or tracking the creature in a reflective surface. The gazing creature gains concealment relative to such an opponent.     LOOK INTO MY EYES! A monster that has a gaze attack can be tricky to play properly because the gaze attack needs to be resolved not only on the monster’s turn but also at the start of every character’s turn. In recent years, I’ve grown lazy and adopted a house rule stating that gaze attacks are swift actions that happen only on the monster’s turn. In other words, a monster can make its gaze attack as a swift action against a single foe on its turn, and characters don’t need to worry about accidentally meeting the creature’s gaze on their turns. Hey, it speeds up play and gets me off the hook.  Frankly, the game could use a few more monsters with gaze attacks that do something other than petrify. A good example is the nothic (introduced in Miniatures Handbook), which has a gaze attack that deals damage—very easy to resolve. I once designed a monster with a gaze attack that compelled the target to make a melee attack against itself as an immediate action. What’s funnier than a character smacking himself in the forehead with a greatclub? Sadly, my players killed the beast before it managed to affect anyone with its gaze. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     59  Grappling Grappling means wrestling hand-to-hand. It’s tricky to perform, but sometimes you want to pin foes instead of killing them, and sometimes you have no choice in the matter. For monsters, grappling can mean trapping you in a toothy maw or holding you down to claw you to pieces.  GRAPPLE CHECKS GRAPPLING  Repeatedly in a grapple, you need to make opposed grapple checks against an opponent. A grapple check is like a melee attack roll, but it’s modified by your grapple modifier. Grapple modifier = base attack bonus + Str modifier + special size modifier + other modifiers  Special Size Modifier The special size modifier for a grapple check is as follows: Colossal +16, Gargantuan +12, Huge +8, Large +4, Medium +0, Small –4, Tiny –8, Diminutive –12, Fine –16. Use this number in place of the normal size modifier you use when making an attack roll.  Other Modifiers Feats, such as Improved Grapple, and other abilities can provide grapple check modifiers.  Illus. by M. Phillippi  INITIATING A GRAPPLE Starting a grapple is an attack. Each time you attempt to start a grapple, you provoke an attack of opportunity from the target you’re trying to grapple. If the attack of opportunity deals damage, the grapple attempt fails. If the attack of opportunity misses or fails to deal damage, you can make a melee touch attack to grab the target. If you fail to hit the target, the grapple attempt fails. If you can make multiple attacks due to a high base attack bonus, you can attempt to start a grapple multiple times by making a full attack. If you succeed in starting the grapple and have remaining attacks, you can use those attacks to perform other maneuvers allowed in a grapple (see Grappling Results).  RESOLVING A GRAPPLE  60  If you hit, make an opposed grapple check as a free action. If you succeed, you and your target are now grappling, and  you deal damage to the target as if with an unarmed strike. If you lose, you fail to start the grapple. You automatically lose an attempt to hold if the target is two or more size categories larger than you are. In case of a tie, the combatant with the higher grapple check modifier wins. If those numbers are identical, roll again to break the tie.  Maintaining a Grapple To maintain a grapple in later rounds, you must move into the target’s space. This movement is free and doesn’t count as part of your movement in the round. Moving in this way provokes attacks of opportunity from threatening opponents, but not from your target. If you can’t move into your target’s space, you can’t maintain the grapple and must immediately let go of the target. To grapple again, you must initiate another grapple.  GRAPPLING RESULTS While you’re grappling, you don’t threaten any squares. You’re denied your Dexterity bonus to AC against opponents you aren’t grappling. You can still use it against opponents you’re grappling. Regardless of who started the grapple, while you’re grappling, you can perform only the following maneuvers. Some maneuvers (as indicated in the following text) can be performed in place of an attack. If you can make multiple attacks because of a high base attack bonus, you can perform as many of one of these maneuvers as you have attacks. You can choose the same or a different maneuver for each attack. A creature that has a high enough base attack bonus can use a fullround action to make a grapple check for every extra attack its base attack bonus would allow it if it were a character. That means such a creature can make two grapple checks if its base attack bonus is +6 to +10, three if +11 to +15, and four if +16 or higher. Activate a Magic Item: You can activate a magic item that isn’t a spell completion item. You don’t need to make a grapple check to activate the item, but it takes the normal time to activate. Attack Your Opponent: You can make an attack with an unarmed strike, a natural weapon, or a light weapon against a creature you’re grappling. You take a –4 penalty on the attack roll. You can’t attack with two weapons while grappling, even if both are light weapons.  If You’re Pinning A pinned opponent is at your mercy. However, while pinning, you don’t have quite the freedom that you did while grappling. You can attempt to damage your opponent with an opposed grapple check, you can attempt to use your opponent’s weapon, or you can attempt to move the grapple (all described above). At your option, you can prevent a pinned opponent from speaking. You can remove or grab away a secured object worn by a pinned opponent by making a disarm attempt (see page 45). The opponent gets a +4 bonus on its roll to resist your attempt. You can release a pinned opponent as a free action. If you do so, you’re no longer considered to be grappling that foe (and vice versa). You finish by moving into any unoccupied space adjacent to that in which you were grappling. You can’t draw or use a weapon (against the pinned creature or any other creature), escape another’s grapple, retrieve a spell component, pin another creature, or break another’s pin while you’re pinning an opponent.  GRAPPLING  A creature can attack with only one of its natural weapons on its turn while grappling, unless it has a special ability that allows it to do otherwise or its description provides an exception. This attack is usually made with the creature’s primary natural weapon. Cast a Spell: You can attempt to cast a spell while grappling or pinned, provided its casting time is no more than 1 standard action, it has no somatic component, and you have in hand any material components or focuses you might need. Any spell that requires precise and careful action is impossible to cast while grappling or pinned. If the spell is one that you can cast while grappling, you must succeed on a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level) or lose the spell. You don’t have to make a grapple check to cast the spell, but it takes its normal casting time to cast. Damage Your Opponent: While grappling, you can deal damage to your opponent equivalent to that dealt by your unarmed strike. Make an opposed grapple check in place of an attack. If you win, you deal nonlethal damage as normal for your unarmed strike. If you want to deal lethal damage, you take a –4 penalty on your grapple check. Draw a Light Weapon: By making a successful grapple check, you can draw a light weapon as a move action. Escape from Grapple: You can escape a grapple by winning an opposed grapple check you make in place of making an attack. You can make an Escape Artist check in place of your grapple check if you so desire, but doing this requires a standard action. If more than one opponent is grappling you, your grapple check result has to beat all their individual grapple check results. Opponents don’t have to try to hold you if they don’t want to. If you escape, you finish by moving into any unoccupied space adjacent to that in which you were grappling. Move: You can move half your speed, bringing all others engaged in the grapple with you, by winning an opposed grapple check. Doing this requires a standard action, and you must beat all the other grapplers’ individual grapple check results to move the grapple. You get a +4 bonus on your grapple check to move a pinned opponent, but only if no one else is involved in the grapple. Retrieve a Spell Component: You can produce a spell component from your pouch while grappling by using a full-round action. Doing so doesn’t require a successful grapple check. Pin Your Opponent: You can hold your opponent stationary for 1 round by winning an opposed grapple check you make in place of an attack. Once you have an opponent pinned, you have a few options available to you (see If You’re Pinning, below). Break Another’s Pin: If you’re grappling an opponent that has another creature pinned, you can make an opposed grapple check in place of an attack. If you win, you break the pin for the other creature. That creature is still grappling, but it is no longer pinned. Use Opponent’s Weapon: If your opponent is holding a light weapon, you can attempt to use that weapon by making an opposed grapple check in place of an attack. If you win, you don’t gain possession of the weapon, but you can attack your opponent with it, taking a –4 penalty on the attack roll. Attacking in this way doesn’t require an additional action.  If You’re Pinned When an opponent has pinned you, you are held stationary (but not helpless) for 1 round. You can’t take any actions the creature pinning you doesn’t allow, even speaking. While you’re pinned, you take a –4 penalty to your AC against opponents other than the one pinning you. You can’t move, so your Dexterity is considered to be 0 for the purpose of determining AC (–5 modifier). You’re also subject to attacks, such as sneak attacks, that rely on a defender’s being denied its Dexterity bonus to AC. To escape, you can make an Escape Artist check in place of a grapple check, but doing this requires a standard action. If you win, you escape the pin, but you’re still grappling.  ATTACKING GRAPPLERS Those not engaged in a grapple can attack those engaged in a grapple. Grapplers take the aforementioned penalties to AC. If you make a ranged attack against a grappler while not engaged in the grapple, you roll randomly to see which grappler your attack strikes.  JOINING A GRAPPLE If your target is already grappling someone else, you can use an attack to start a grapple, except that the target doesn’t get an attack of opportunity against you, and your grab automatically succeeds. You still have to succeed on an opposed grapple check to become part of the grapple. If multiple opponents are involved in the grapple, you pick one to make the opposed grapple check against.  Multiple Grapplers Several combatants can be in a single grapple. Up to four combatants can grapple a single opponent during a given round. Creatures that are one or more size categories smaller than you count for half, creatures that are one size category larger than you count double, and creatures two or more size categories larger than you count quadruple. When you’re grappling with multiple opponents, you choose one opponent to make an opposed check against, except when you’re trying to perform an act that requires you to beat all the other grapplers.  61  Helpless Defenders A helpless defender is paralyzed, held, bound, sleeping, unconscious, or otherwise completely at your mercy.  ATTACKING HELPLESS DEFENDERS  A helpless defender takes a –4 penalty to AC against melee attacks, but no penalty to AC against ranged attacks. Its Dexterity score is considered to be 0, so its Dexterity modifier is considered to be –5. A helpless defender is subject to attacks, such as sneak attacks, that rely on a defender being denied its Dexterity bonus to AC.  Illus. by M. Phillippi  Coup de Grace As a full-round action that provokes attacks of opportunity, you can use a melee weapon to deliver a coup de grace to a helpless defender. You can instead use a bow or crossbow, provided you’re adjacent to the target. You automatically hit and score a critical hit. If the defender survives the damage, it must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC 10 + damage dealt) or die. Precision damage (see page 42) applies to a coup de grace when all other conditions for that damage are also met. You can’t deliver a coup de grace against a creature that is immune to extra damage from critical hits, such as a golem. You can deliver a coup de grace against a creature that has total concealment, but doing this requires two consecutive full-round actions—one to find the creature once you’ve determined what square it’s in, and one to deliver the coup de grace.  SHARING SPACES You can freely enter a square that contains a helpless creature, unless the DM rules otherwise, sharing that creature’s space. If you’re in a space with a helpless Small or larger creature that ceases being helpless, and for whatever reason that creature can’t share spaces with you, the creature must be or remain prone, attempt to grapple you, or leave your space at its first opportunity. It provokes attacks of opportunity as normal for what it does.     PRONOUNCING DEATH The glossary of the 3.0 Player’s Handbook featured the pronunciation of coup de grace as “koo-day-grah.” It wasn’t long before French-speaking D&D fans the world over corrected us on our Americanized (okay, they said mistaken) pronunciation of their famous and flavorful attack. This faux pas led us to drop the pronunciation guide in the 3.5 Player’s Handbook. While doing that reduced the amount of correspondence on the subject, it has led to a crazy diversity of pronunciations, even at the same table.  So we asked our resident Wizards French speakers to pronounce the term for us, and then checked and compared numerous pronunciation guides. We’ve determined that “koode-grahs” is the closest to the true pronunciation of the term our American lips and tongues can manage. Given that French, like any language, has numerous dialects and accents, we’re sure someone out there will disagree, so we look forward to a new round of posts and letters on the subject. —Stephen Radney-MacFarland, developer     62  Rules and Fun by James Wyatt, designer  INTERLUDE: RULES AND FUN  Why does D&D have rules? Why does this book exist? Wouldn’t it be fun to gather a group of your friends together and engage in a collaborative form of storytelling together, crafting an epic tale of high fantasy? You could tell any story you could imagine, invent the strangest and most fantastic magic, shake the earth and tear the heavens. You could do anything you could dream, within your story, and leave that gathering inspired. Story has power. Our myths shape the way we live. It’s possible that what I’ve just described is not too different from one of your D&D sessions. I’ve heard people brag that they hardly ever roll dice when they play D&D. When some people think about D&D as a roleplaying game, that first word is the most important—roleplaying. It’s almost a form of improvisational theater, immersing themselves in characters, trying to imagine what those characters would do in the fantastic situations of the D&D world. Improvisational theater or collaborative storytelling. One of the great elements of roleplaying, in this sense, is that you’re not having a story fed to you. You are participating in the creation of the story. That’s one of the things that makes it fun—your involvement in it, your ability to explore a vast expanse of possibility that’s limited only by your imagination (and that of your DM). Game theorist and designer Will Wright has said, “Fun is the process of discovering areas in a possibility space.” In D&D, that kind of fun never ends. But the second half of “roleplaying game” is game. Some people focus on that word almost to the exclusion of the first. They view D&D purely as a tactical simulation—an exercise in die-rolling and probability. But fundamentally, D&D is a game about roleplaying, rather than a roleplaying exercise like you might encounter in a corporate training exercise or a session with a psychologist. Games have rules. Why have rules? For people who don’t like dice with their D&D, the rules might seem to get in the way of fun. For the tactical simulation crowd, who can’t be bothered to roleplay, the fun is entirely in the rules. But in a roleplaying game, the rules contribute to fun in two important ways. The first is that rules define limits. Part of the fun of a game is puzzle-solving. The biggest puzzle of D&D is figuring out how to succeed within the limits of the rules. In a pure storytelling exercise, someone can present a challenge for the protagonists, but there might not be a lot of challenge to figure out how to overcome it, because no limits exist as to what you can do. The protagonists of an improvisational story can be godlike, easily overcoming any obstacle. Children’s playground games are a fine example of this. When my son and I act out imaginary battles, I can’t win, because he constantly invents defenses against my attacks and creates new attacks to assault me. His imagination is faster than mine, so he wins. Rules limit that escalation and enforce balance. They carefully define your chance of succeeding on many of the  things your character might attempt in the course of an adventure. Fundamentally, game balance is about making sure that everyone has the same limits, or rather, limits that give them roughly equal chances of success in different ways. A fighter and a wizard fight very differently, and they’re skilled at different roles, but if they’re balanced with each other, they have equal opportunities to defeat their foes and emerge from the dungeon victorious. And that makes the game more fun. When my son and I play D&D, he has to figure out how to beat my monsters given the spells and abilities at his character’s disposal. He’s inclined to invent spells that will let him defeat any monster I throw at him, but the rules let me say, “Well, that should be a higher-level spell than you can cast. Maybe in a couple more levels.” D&D combat is a lot more fun, for me at least, than being conquered by a fevered imagination. The second way rules contribute to fun is by setting out possibilities. D&D’s rules as limits largely fit between the covers of this book. That’s actually pretty amazing—people think of D&D as an incredibly complex game with entire bookshelves full of rules. The vast majority of those rules, though, are not limits—they’re possibilities. Most D&D books are full of classes you can adopt, spells you can cast, monsters you can fight. Even when you’re not actively playing the game, you can look through your books and sample the possibilities. You can plan your character’s advancement—choose the feats you want to take over the next several levels, pick your next spells, browse the prestige classes. You can stock dungeons with monsters, traps, and treasures. You can build a whole world from the possibilities expressed in the rules. You can even make up your own rules—your own prestige class, spell, feat, race, or monster. Rules are a two-edged sword where possibilities are concerned, though. In a computer game, the rules (that is to say, the computer code) define the possibilities of what you can do very narrowly. If you want to crawl underneath a bed and the game doesn’t let you crawl, you just can’t. The rules are too restrictive. The rules of D&D, though, limit your options without too narrowly defi ning them. The beauty of D&D is that your character can try anything you can imagine. The rules are there as a yardstick to measure your chance of success. What’s most fun about D&D, though—at least in my opinion—is that the game is what you want it to be. If you’re more interested in the roleplaying than in the game, or the other way around, the game can accommodate your preference. Whatever your taste in fantasy, you can create it within the framework of the rules. If you want to immerse yourself in the game, build your own world from the hamlet level up (or from the cosmological level down), the game will reward you for all that work. If you want to show up one evening a week and hang out with your friends, rolling a few dice when someone pokes you, the game will reward that level of involvement as well. The fun is there for the finding—in this one book of rules limits and in the ever-expanding universe of rules possibilities.  63  Incorporeality An incorporeal creature is insubstantial, unlike a corporeal creatures, which is solid and tangible. Some creatures are incorporeal by nature, while others can acquire the incorporeal subtype from time to time.  TRAITS INCORPOREALITY  An incorporeal creature has no physical body. It doesn’t need to eat, drink, or breathe, and indeed can’t do these things since it can’t affect physical objects, even air. Such a creature has no natural armor bonus, but it has a deflection bonus to AC equal to its Charisma bonus or +1, whichever is higher. It has no Strength score, so its Dexterity modifier applies to its melee attacks and its ranged attacks. An incorporeal creature has no weight. Further, it can’t set off traps that are triggered by weight. It can’t fall or take falling damage. Most incorporeal creatures can fly.  Illus. by S. Wood  SENSING In almost all cases, nonvisual senses are ineffective for detecting or pinpointing incorporeal creatures. Blindsense, blindsight, scent, and tremorsense are all useless. An incorporeal creature moves silently and can’t be heard with Listen checks if it doesn’t wish to be. If an incorporeal creature chooses to make noise, it can be detected by means of normal hearing, or by blindsense or blindsight based on acute hearing. If a creature possesses some other nonvisual sense, use your best judgment in determining the effectiveness of that sense in detecting an incorporeal creature.  HARMING  64  An incorporeal creature can be harmed only by other incorporeal creatures, magic weapons or creatures that strike as magic weapons, and spells, spell-like abilities, or supernatural abilities. It’s immune to all nonmagical attack forms. Even when hit by spells (including touch spells) or magic weapons, an incorporeal creature has a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal source—except for positive  energy, negative energy, force effects such as magic missile, or attacks made with ghost touch weapons. Although it isn’t strictly a magical attack, holy water can damage incorporeal undead, but a hit with holy water has a 50% chance of not affecting such a creature. For attacks that require attack rolls, the chance to ignore damage is treated as a 50% miss chance. If a creature receives miss chances from multiple sources, such as from being incorporeal and having concealment, they don’t stack. Only the highest miss chance applies. Nondamaging effects affect incorporeal creatures normally unless such effects require corporeal targets to function (such as implosion) or they create a corporeal effect that incorporeal creatures are normally unaffected by (such as web or wall of stone).  ATTACKS An incorporeal creature’s attacks ignore natural armor, armor, and shields, although deflection bonuses and force effects (such as mage armor) work normally against such attacks. An incorporeal touch attack isn’t the same as a melee touch attack— armor can work against an incorporeal touch attack if the armor has the ghost touch property. Nonmagical attacks made by an incorporeal creature with a melee weapon have no effect on corporeal targets, a nd a ny melee attack an incorporeal creature makes with a magic weapon against a corporeal target has a 50% miss chance, except for attacks it makes with a ghost touch weapon, which are made normally (no miss chance). If an incorporeal creature throws a thrown weapon or a shoots a ranged weapon, the projectile becomes corporeal as soon as it’s thrown or fired, and thus can affect a corporeal target normally (no miss chance). An incorporeal creature can’t trip or grapple, nor can it be tripped or grappled. In fact, it can’t perform any physical act that moves or manipulates a corporeal opponent or that foe’s equipment, nor is it subject to such acts. An incorporeal creature that attempts to grapple or move another incorporeal creature or object uses its Charisma  modifier for rolls on which a Strength modifier normally applies.  EQUIPMENT  OTHER CREATURES An incorporeal creature can occupy the same space as a corporeal creature, unless the corporeal creature is entirely surrounded by a force effect. An incorporeal creature entering a corporeal creature’s space (or vice versa) provokes attacks of opportunity as normal for moving into another creature’s space. The entering creature must then succeed on a touch attack against the target to share the same physical space. If the target is helpless or doesn’t resist, no attack is necessary. If the attack succeeds, the entering creature moves into the target’s space. This attack deals no damage, even if the entering creature’s touch attack normally deals damage. If the attack fails, the entering creature returns to the space it occupied before entering the target’s space. An incorporeal creature occupying the space of a corporeal creature might gain cover, while the corporeal creature might gain concealment. See the Sharing Spaces table. For example, a shadow sharing the space of an ogre gains cover, but the ogre gains no benefit. A shadow sharing the space of a halfl ing grants the halfl ing concealment, but gains no benefit itself. A shadow sharing the space of a human gains cover, and the human gains concealment. This cover or concealment affects even attacks made by the other creature sharing the space. Either creature can end the “sharing” of a space simply by leaving that space. Doing so leaves the other creature in the space. If the leaving creature moves more than 5 feet, this movement provokes attacks of opportunity as normal for leaving a threatened square.  Incorporeal Creature Is . . . Two or more size categories larger One size category larger Same size One size category smaller Two or more size categories smaller3  Incorporeal Creature Gains . . . — — Cover Cover Total cover2  Corporeal Creature Gains . . . Total concealment1 Concealment Concealment — —  1 If the corporeal creature makes a melee attack against a creature outside the space of the incorporeal creature, this benefit is reduced to concealment. 2 If the incorporeal creature makes a melee attack against a creature outside the space of the corporeal creature, this benefit is reduced to cover. 3 The incorporeal creature can ignore any armor bonus the corporeal creature might have from force effects.  INCORPOREALITY  Incorporeal creatures can’t manipulate or carry corporeal objects. A creature must be able to swallow a potion or smear on an oil. Because of this, incorporeal creatures can’t use potions or oils. Equipment worn or carried by an incorporeal creature is also incorporeal as long as that equipment remains in the creature’s possession. An object the creature relinquishes loses its incorporeal quality, and the creature loses the ability to manipulate that object. Magic items possessed by an incorporeal creature work normally with respect to their effects on the creature or on another target. Similarly, spells cast by an incorporeal creature affect corporeal creatures normally.  Sharing Spaces  ENVIRONMENT An incorporeal creature can’t pass through a force effect. It can pass through and operate in water as easily as it does in air. Such a creature can enter or pass through solid objects, but it must remain adjacent to the object’s exterior, which means it can’t pass directly through an object whose space is larger than its own. It has an innate sense of direction, allowing it to move at full speed even when it can’t see. Although an incorporeal creature inside an object can sense the presence of creatures or objects in a square adjacent to its current location, such objects or creatures have total concealment against the incorporeal creature’s attacks while it remains inside the object. An incorporeal creature hiding inside a solid object receives a +2 circumstance bonus on Listen checks, because solid objects carry sound well. Pinpointing an opponent from inside a solid object uses the same rules as pinpointing invisible opponents. To sense farther from the object it is inside and attack normally, the incorporeal creature must emerge. An incorporeal creature inside an object has total cover, but when it attacks a creature outside the object, it has only cover. An incorporeal creature can also occupy the same space as a solid object without being inside that object, and it typically gains cover from doing so. Compare the size of the incorporeal creature to the size of the corporeal object. Consult the Sharing Spaces table to determine the extent of cover enjoyed by the incorporeal creature.     A QUESTION OF INCORPOREALITY With all the moving parts of D&D, it’s no surprise that occasionally some tidbit is solved in seemingly random fashion. While working on Complete Arcane, I discovered the ghostform spell, which allowed the caster to assume an incorporeal form. Picked up from Tome and Blood, the spell had previously been ridiculously overpowered, and development had already reduced the duration and increased the spell’s level to 8th. But when reading through the spell, I realized I had a ton of questions. The spell addressed damaging spell effects, but what about nondamaging effects?  Could a caster under the effect of ghostform be dominated or slowed? Or gain the benefit of allied spells? On perusing the Monster Manual, I realized that this wasn’t an omission in the spell, but rather in the incorporeal subtype itself. Luckily, we were working Monster Manual III simultaneously, in which we’d already planned to release an updated glossary. The changes to the incorporeal subtype were made and entered, and now ghosts everywhere can rejoice that they now know whether or not they can be affected by the control undead spell. —Chris Thomasson, editor     65  INFLUENCE AND INTERACTION  Inﬂuence and Interaction Certain skills allow you persuade, fool, and otherwise influence others in the game world. Some of these skills can be used against player characters as well, but players decide what their characters do unless those characters are magically compelled to do otherwise. Use the following table to determine the effectiveness of checks (usually Diplomacy) made to influence the attitude of a nonplayer character.  Influencing NPC Attitudes Initial —— New Attitude (DC to achieve) —— Attitude Hostile Unfriendly Indifferent Friendly Helpful Hostile < 20 20 25 35 50 Unfriendly < 5 5 15 25 40 Indifferent — <1 1 15 30 Friendly — — <1 1 20 Helpful — — — <1 1 Attitude Hostile  Means Will take risks to hurt you Unfriendly Wishes you ill  Possible Activities Attack, interfere, berate, flee Mislead, gossip, avoid, watch suspiciously, insult Indifferent Doesn’t much care Socially expected interaction Friendly Wishes you well Chat, advise, offer limited help, advocate Helpful Will take risks Protect, back up, heal, aid to help you  BLUFF (CHA) To con, misdirect, and mislead, you make a Bluff check. A Bluff check is opposed by the target’s Sense Motive check. See the following table for examples of different kinds of bluffs and the Sense Motive modifier for each one. A Bluff check made as part of general interaction is at least a full-round action, but it can take much longer if you try something elaborate. A bluff requires interaction between you and the target. Creatures unaware of you can’t be bluffed. Favorable and unfavorable circumstances weigh heavily on the outcome of a bluff. It’s unfavorable if the bluff is hard to believe or the act that the target is asked to undertake goes against its self-interest, nature, personality, orders, or the like. You can distinguish between a bluff that fails because the target doesn’t believe it and one that fails because it asks too much of the target. If the target gets a +10 bonus on its Sense Motive check because the bluff demands something risky, and the Sense Motive check succeeds by 10 or less, then the target didn’t so much see through the bluff as prove reluctant to go along with it. A target that succeeds by 11 or more has seen through the bluff. A successful Bluff check indicates that the target reacts as you wish, at least for 1 round but sometimes less, or believes something that you want it to believe. A failed Bluff check in social interaction makes the target too suspicious for you to try again in the same circumstances.  66  Bluff and Sense Motive Circumstances Sense Motive Modifier Target wants to believe you –5 Bluff is believable and doesn’t affect the target much +0 Bluff is a little hard to believe or puts the target at risk +5 Bluff is hard to believe or puts the target at great risk +10 Bluff is almost too incredible to consider +20  Secret Messages You can use Bluff to get a message across to another without others understanding it. You make a Bluff check as part of communicating (no action). The DC is 15 for simple messages or 20 for complex messages, especially those that rely on getting across new information. Failure by 4 or less means you can’t get the message across. Failure by 5 or more means that some false information has been implied or inferred. The Bluff check is made secretly, so that you can’t be sure you got the message across. You can keep trying to communicate a message, but you can attempt the exchange only once per round. Each retry carries the same chance of miscommunication.  Heckling You can heckle a performer by taking 1 minute and making a Bluff check opposed by the performer’s Concentration check. If you win, the performer must make a new Perform check with a –2 penalty plus an additional –2 for every 5 points by which you won the opposed check. If you lose, the audience sides with the performer, who gains a +2 circumstance bonus on the Perform check for that performance. Some audience members might be unfriendly toward you if the performer’s Perform check is successful. You can make only one check to heckle during a given performance.  DIPLOMACY (CHA) Diplomacy involves etiquette, social grace, tact, subtlety, and a way with words. You can change the attitudes of others with a successful Diplomacy check that takes at least 1 minute. A rushed Diplomacy check can be made as a full-round action, but you take a –10 penalty on the check. Even if the initial Diplomacy check succeeds, an NPC can be persuaded only so far, so pushing further might do more harm than good. If the initial check fails, the NPC has probably become more firmly committed to his position, so a retry is futile. See the Influencing NPC Attitudes table for basic DCs.  Haggling You can use the Diplomacy skill to lower the asking price of an item by taking 1 minute to haggle. To do so, make a Diplomacy check, taking the typical DC for influencing an NPC and adding the seller’s Diplomacy modifier to the DC. Most sellers start out indifferent. If you improve the seller’s attitude to helpful, you receive a 10% discount. If you worsen the seller’s attitude to unfriendly or worse, that seller refuses to sell anything to you for at least 24 hours.  Mediating To mediate a disagreement between parties that are not already hostile toward one another, you must spend a day  for a short time, check once per hour, using an average Spot modifier for the group. Divination magic that allows people to see through illusions (such as true seeing) doesn’t penetrate a mundane disguise, but it can negate the magical component of a magically enhanced one. If you’re impersonating a particular individual, those who know what that person looks like get a bonus on their Spot checks according to the Spotting a Disguise table. Furthermore, they’re automatically considered to be suspicious of you, so opposed checks are always called for.  INFLUENCE AND INTERACTION  and succeed in adjusting each group’s attitude to friendly or better toward the other party in the negotiation. To do so, make a Diplomacy check with the normal DC for influencing an NPC, adding the group leader’s Diplomacy modifier to the DC. The DC increases by 5 if the two parties are of different cultures or races. You can take a –10 penalty on the check to attempt mediation in 1 hour. As long at least one side remains unfriendly or better, you can retry a Diplomacy check made to mediate a disagreement.  Other Checks In negotiations, participants roll opposed Diplomacy checks, and the winner gains the advantage. Opposed checks also resolve situations when two advocates or diplomats plead opposite cases in a hearing before a third party.  DISGUISE (CHA)  Familiarity Check Bonus Recognizes on sight +4 Friends or associates +6 Close friends +8 Intimate +10  GATHER INFORMATION (CHA) With 1d4+1 hours, money for buying drinks and making friends, and a Gather Information check, you to learn about a topic you’re interested in. The higher your check result, the better the information. If you want to find out about something specific or secret, the DC is higher, as determined by the DM and the circumstances. You might draw attention to yourself if you repeatedly pursue a particular piece or type of information. Illus. by S. Belledin  Use this skill to change your own appearance or someone else’s. The effort requires at least a few props, some makeup, and 1d3×10 minutes of work. A disguise can include an apparent change of height or weight amounting to no more than one-tenth of the original. Your Disguise check result determines how good the disguise is, and the check is opposed by observers’ Spot checks. If you don’t draw any attention to yourself, others don’t get to make Spot checks. If you come to the attention of observers who are suspicious, it can be assumed that such observers are taking 10 on their Spot checks. You can make only one Disguise check per disguise, even if several observers are making Spot checks against it. The Disguise check is made secretly, so that you can’t be sure how good the result is. You can try to redo a failed disguise, but once others know that a disguise was attempted, they become more suspicious. The effectiveness of your disguise depends in part on how much you’re attempting to change your appearance, according to the following table.  Spotting a Disguise  Disguise Alterations Check Modifier Disguised as different gender1 –2 Disguised as different race1 –2 Disguised as different age category1 –22 Form-altering magic3 +10 Minor details only +5 1 These modifiers stack; use all that apply. 2 Per step of difference between your actual age category and your disguised age category. The steps are: young (younger than adulthood), adulthood, middle age, old, and venerable. 3 Magic that alters your form, such as alter self, disguise self, polymorph, and shapechange. See specific spell descriptions.  Observers Usually, an individual makes a Spot check to see through your disguise immediately upon meeting you and each hour thereafter. If you casually meet many different creatures, each  67  Gather Information  INFLUENCE AND INTERACTION  Information DC Public 10 Private Exclusive  15 20  Secret  25  Unknown Specific  30 +5  Examples Major news, local government issues, local guild structure Gossip, private club, military figures Scandals, invitation-only club, local criminals Secrets, espionage group, criminal cartel Shadow government, underground cult A particular noble’s affairs; who robbed the bank  INTIMIDATE (CHA) Intimidation includes verbal threats and menacing body language. You intimidate a target by taking 1 minute of interaction and making an Intimidate check opposed by the target’s modified level check (1d20 + character level or Hit Dice + target’s Wis bonus [if any] + target’s modifiers on saves against fear). You gain a +4 bonus on your Intimidate check for every size category that you are larger than your target. Conversely, you take a –4 penalty on your Intimidate check for every size category that you are smaller than your target. A creature that is immune to fear can’t be intimidated, nor can nonintelligent creatures. If you can intimidate the target and you beat its check result, you can treat that target as friendly, but only for the purpose of activities undertaken while it remains intimidated. A target stays intimidated for as long as it remains in your presence, and for 1d6×10 minutes afterward. After this time, the target’s default attitude toward you shifts to unfriendly or, if normally unfriendly, to hostile. If the target’s check result beats yours by 5 or more, the target provides you with incorrect or useless information, or otherwise frustrates your efforts. Since the DM makes the target’s check, you might not know you’ve been thwarted.  Demoralize Opponent You can also use Intimidate as a standard action against an opponent that you threaten in melee combat and that can see you, weakening that opponent’s resolve in combat. To do so, make an Intimidate check opposed by the target’s modified level check. If you win, the target becomes shaken for 1 round.  Duel of Wills  68  Before initiative is rolled in a combat situation, you can initiate a duel of wills against an opponent within 30 feet that you have line of sight to (and vice versa). Doing this doesn’t take an action. Only creatures that have Intelligence scores of 3 or higher can engage in a duel of wills, and you can attempt only one duel of wills per encounter. When you fix your eyes on your opponent, that creature has three options. Submit: The opponent takes a –2 penalty on its initiative check and a –1 penalty on attack rolls against you for 1 round. Ignore: The opponent ignores you, but if you succeed on a DC 15 Intimidate check, you receive a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls against that opponent for 1 round. Participate: You and the opponent make opposed Intimidate checks. The winner gains a +1 bonus on attack rolls and  damage rolls against the loser. The loser takes a –1 penalty on attack rolls and damage rolls against the winner. These modifiers last for the duration of the encounter.  SENSE MOTIVE (WIS) This skill represents sensitivity to the body language, speech habits, and mannerisms of others, as well as social intuition and awareness. Sense Motive is used to oppose Bluff checks—once per Bluff check used against you. You can also use this skill to determine when something odd is going on or to assess someone’s trustworthiness.  Assess Opponent As a standard action, you can use Sense Motive to ascertain how tough a challenge a visible target within 30 feet poses for you. If you have seen the target in combat, you gain a +2 circumstance bonus on the check. This check is opposed by the target’s Bluff check. If you succeed, you know your opponent belongs to one of two threat categories—its actual one, and the one lower or higher (50% chance of either). If you win by 10 or more, you know the actual threat. If the target wins, you gain no useful information. If the target wins by 5 to 9, you believe the target to be one category stronger or weaker than it really is (50% chance of either). If the target wins by 10 or more, your assessment is off by two categories (higher or lower; 50% chance of either). Opponent’s CR is . . . Under your level or HD by 4 or more Under your level or HD by 1 to 3 Equal to your level or HD Exceeds your level or HD by up to 3 Exceeds your level or HD by 4 or more  Result A pushover Easy A fair fight A tough challenge A dire threat  A target that is particularly vulnerable to your typical attack routine (a vampire facing a high-level good-aligned cleric) is considered one category less challenging. One that is resistant to your typical attack routine (a golem against a sneak attacker) registers as one category more challenging.  Discern Secret Message You can use Sense Motive to detect that a hidden message is being transmitted by means of the Bluff skill. In this case, your Sense Motive check is opposed by the Bluff check of the creature transmitting the message. For each piece of information relating to the message that you’re missing, you take a –2 penalty on your Sense Motive check. If you succeed by 4 or less, you know that something hidden is being communicated, but you can’t learn anything specific about its content. If you beat the DC by 5 or more, you intercept and understand the message. If you fail by 4 or less, you don’t detect any hidden communication. If you fail by 5 or more, you infer some false information. You can check against each use of the Bluff skill to communicate a secret message.  Hunch With a successful DC 20 Sense Motive check and 1 minute, you can make a gut assessment of the social situation. You can get the feeling from another’s behavior that something  is wrong, such as when you’re talking to an impostor. Alternatively, you can get the feeling that someone is trustworthy. If you fail, you can’t try again.  Sense Enchantment  HIRELINGS When the PCs need to hire someone to perform a task, hirelings are the NPCs they employ. Hirelings don’t make decisions. They do as they’re told. Thus, even if they go on an adventure with the PCs, they gain no experience and don’t affect any calculations involving the party level. Hirelings must be treated fairly and well, or they might leave or turn against their employers. The following table gives an idea of the daily wage that hirelings of various types expect or demand. The prices on the table are for long-term retention of services. Hiring someone for just a day or two might cost two or three times the indicated price. The prices don’t include materials, tools, or weapons the hireling might need to do the job. Hirelings might require hazard pay as high as double normal pay if placed in particularly dangerous situations. In addition to demanding hazard pay, hirelings placed in great danger might become unfriendly.  NPC SPELLCASTING Assuming that the PCs can find a caster of the needed level who is amenable to helping them out, the NPC charges 10 gp per spell level × caster level (5 gp × caster level for a 0-level spell). If a spell has an expensive material component, the NPC expects the clients to pay for those expenses in addition to the base cost. If the spell requires a focus component (other than a divine focus), the NPC expects the PCs to pay 10% of the cost of the focus. Finally, if the spell has an XP component, the NPC charges an additional 5 gp for each experience point expended.  Hireling Alchemist*  Pay/Day Services 1 gp Works with chemicals. Includes apothecaries. Animal tender 15 cp Cares for animals. Includes grooms, shepherds, shearers, and swineherds. Architect 5 sp Plans large building projects. Includes engineers and shipwrights. Artisan 6 sp Produces works of art. Barrister 1 gp A lawyer. Clerk 4 sp Keeps accounts. Includes interpreters. Cook 1 sp Prepares meals, often for large groups. Entertainer 4 sp Performs works of art. Includes minstrels, actors, singers, dancers, and orators. Laborer 1 sp Does unskilled labor. Includes gravediggers, maids, and porters, among others. Craftsperson* 3 sp Works in a trade. Includes carpenters, dyers, jewelers, tinkers, and weavers, among others. Mercenary 2 sp Fights for pay—a 1st-level warrior. Mercenary 4 sp Fights from horseback—a 1stcavalry level warrior. Mercenary 6 sp Fights for pay and leads other leader mercs—2nd-level warrior. Add 3 sp/day per level above 2nd. Sage 2+ gp Provides information and research services. Scribe 3 sp Writes. Includes scriveners. Smith 4 sp* Works metal. Includes armorers, blacksmiths, locksmiths, metalsmiths, and minters, among others. Teamster 3 sp Drives a wagon or cart. Valet/lackey 2 sp Performs various specialized and personal duties. * If paid to create a specific item, use item prices and working times instead.  INFLUENCE AND INTERACTION  By observing someone for a minute, you can tell if that person’s behavior is being influenced by an enchantment effect, even if that person isn’t aware of it. The usual DC is 25, but if the target is dominated (see dominate person), the DC is only 15 because of the limited range of the target’s activities. If you fail, you can’t try again.  Hirelings     OPENING ROLEPLAYING’S DOOR Since D&D is a game in which contact with others usually ends in a fight, setting up an encounter when you want to give PCs a chance to talk to a monster or a dangerous-looking NPC can be tricky. And you can’t really blame players when the difference between smart and dead can hinge on the result of an initiative check, and taking that –10 for a rushed Diplomacy check can be a harrowing affair.  Try this: Specifically tell the players that their potential allies are trying to parley, roll the check out in the open, and even flavor the description based on the result of the roll. Although you should never tell a player that his character’s attitude has changed, a mix of die rolls and stirring narrative can open the door for some very flavorful social encounters. Of course, if you botch that roll, roleplaying the hurling of unintentional insults at PCs can be great fun too! —Stephen Radney-MacFarland, developer     69  Initiative Every round, each combatant gets to do something. The combatants’ initiative check results, counted from highest to lowest, determine the order in which they act.  INITIATIVE CHECKS INITIATIVE  At the start of a battle, if both sides are aware at the same time and can interact, each combatant makes an initiative check, which is a Dexterity check. The results show what order combatants are acting in, counting down from highest result to lowest. Each combatant acts in turn on his or her initiative count. In every round that follows, the combatants act in the same order unless one of them does something that results in an initiative change. If two or more combatants have the same initiative check result, the combatants who are tied act in order of highest initiative modifier first. If a tie persists, the tied combatants roll again to determine which one of them goes first. Usually, the DM writes the names of the combatants down in initiative count order so that combat moves along smoothly during subsequent rounds.  MONSTER INITIATIVE  Illus. by W. Reynolds  The DM makes a single initiative check for monsters and other opponents, so each player gets a turn each round and  70  the DM also gets one turn. At the DM’s option, however, each monster or group of monsters can make a separate initiative check.  FLAT-FOOTED At the start of a battle, before your first regular turn in the initiative order, you’re flat-footed. You’re denied your Dexterity bonus to AC while flat-footed. A flat-footed creature can’t make attacks of opportunity.  INACTION Even if you can’t take actions, you retain your initiative count for the duration of the encounter.  SURPRISE An encounter can begin in one of three situations. When the DM decides it’s possible for either side to become aware of the other, he uses Spot checks, Listen checks, and so on to determine which of these three cases comes into play. • Both sides become aware of each other at the same time. Then normal initiative checks ensue. • One side becomes aware of the other and can act first. • Some, but not all, creatures on one or both sides become aware of the other side and can act.  SURPRISE ROUND  One Side Aware In this case, the DM determines how much time the aware side has before the unaware side can react. Sometimes, the unaware side has no time to do anything before the aware side gets a chance to act. The aware side gets a surprise round. After that, both sides make initiative checks to determine the order in which the combatants act. Other times, the aware side has a few rounds to prepare. The DM tracks time in rounds at this point to determine how much the aware combatants can accomplish. Once the two sides can interact, the aware combatants receive a surprise round. If the aware side alerts the unaware side before the two can interact, then both sides are treated as aware.  Some on Both Sides Aware In this case, only the combatants that are aware can act. These creatures receive a surprise round.  NEW COMBATANTS If, in the course of a battle between two sides, another group enters the battle, that group should come into the combat at the beginning of the next round. The following rules apply to this situation, whether or not the new group is allied with one or more existing sides involved in the encounter.  else. In effect, they go first in the initiative sequence. Their initiative check result is considered to be 1 higher than the highest initiative check result among the original participants in the encounter. If differentiation is needed for the actions of the newcomers, they act in order of their Dexterity scores, highest to lowest. The reason for this rule is twofold. • Since they’re aware, but no way exists for them to take an action ahead of everyone else (because the encounter has already started), they go first to simulate their advantage. This happens whether the other sides are aware of the newcomers or not. • Placing the newcomers at the beginning of the round means that those who had the highest initiative check results prior to the newcomers’ arrival are the first combatants to have an opportunity to react to them. This is an important advantage for those who have high places in the initiative order.  INITIATIVE  If some but not all the combatants are aware of their opponents, a surprise round happens before regular rounds begin. Any combatants aware of the opponents can act during the surprise round, so they make initiative checks. In initiative order (highest to lowest), combatants who started the battle aware of their opponents can act. They’re restricted to a single standard action or move action during the surprise round. They can also take free actions during the surprise round, at the DM’s discretion. Combatants who are unaware at the start of battle don’t get to act during the surprise round. Unaware combatants are flat-footed. If no one or everyone is surprised, the surprise round doesn’t occur.  NEWCOMERS UNAWARE If any or all of the newcomers aren’t aware of the other sides when they enter the encounter, the newcomers still come into play at the beginning of the round, but they make initiative checks normally. If one of the other combatants involved in the encounter has a higher initiative check result than one or more of the newcomers, that combatant can react to those newcomers before they can act.  SIMULTANEOUS ACTIVITY When playing out a combat scene or some other activity for which time is measured in rounds, remember that all the combatants’ actions occur simultaneously. The combatants’ acting in turn according to the initiative count is a situation necessary for order in game play, but it’s an abstraction. This sequential order of play can lead to situations when something significant happens to a combatant at the end of that creature’s turn but before other creatures have acted in the same round. It’s up to the DM whether other combatants who have yet to act during the round can react to an event that happens to another combatant in this way.  NEWCOMERS AWARE If any (or all) of the newcomers are aware of one or both of the sides in a battle, they take their actions before anyone     FIXING INITIATIVE Fixing 2nd Edition’s initiative system was a priority for the 3rd Edition design team. 2nd Edition’s system effectively made you go around the table two times per round. Each player had to first declare an intended action, and then resolve the declared actions—many of which became impossible due to events in the combat. Initiative modifiers for different weapons and spells caused this “first declare, then resolve” system. Plus, it was an example of a “low is good” roll in the system, and we wanted to get rid of those.  We experimented briefly with using a “category” initiative system such as the one that appeared in Player’s Option: Combat and Tactics, but ultimately Jonathan Tweet brought the winning solution with him when he joined the 3rd Edition design team. I wasn’t sure about it at first, but a couple of playtests quickly demonstrated the superiority of Jonathan’s cyclical initiative system. It’s twice as fast as the 2nd Edition system, it saves a roll each round, and it’s absolutely fair. —Rich Baker, designer     71  INJURY, HEALING, AND DEATH  Injury, Healing, and Death When a creature takes hit point damage, that damage can be lethal or nonlethal. Lethal damage can result in injury or death, while nonlethal damage can cause loss of fighting capability and unconsciousness. Injured creatures can recover and heal, but sometimes they die. Fortunately in D&D, death isn’t always the end.  LETHAL DAMAGE Most attacks deal lethal damage, which is subtracted from a creature’s hit points. Hit points measure how hard a creature is to kill. Hit points represent the ability to take physical punishment and keep going, and the ability to turn a serious blow into a less serious one. For some creatures, hit points can represent divine favor or inner power.  LOSS OF HIT POINTS An uninjured creature has its full normal hit points. As it takes lethal damage, subtract that damage from its hit points, leaving it with its current hit points. Current hit points go down with damage and go back up when a creature heals. Damage doesn’t slow a creature down until its current hit points reach 0 or fewer—see Injury.  Massive Damage If a single attack deals 50 points of damage or more and doesn’t kill the target outright, that creature must make a DC 15 Fortitude save. If this save fails, the creature dies regardless of its current hit points. Taking 50 points of damage or more from multiple attacks isn’t considered massive damage as long as no single attack deals 50 or more points of damage by itself.  CHANGES IN HIT POINTS If a creature’s Constitution score increases, that creature gains 1 hit point per Hit Die for every point by which its Constitution modifier goes up. Such hit points aren’t the same as temporary hit points. They can be healed with magic and even naturally, if the effect that caused them to appear remains long enough. If a creature’s Constitution score drops, that creature loses 1 hit point per Hit Die for every point by which its Constitution modifier drops. Loss of Constitution can’t reduce a creature’s full normal hit points to less than 1 hit point per Hit Die. It can reduce a wounded creature’s current hit points to 0 or fewer. A creature reduced to 0 Constitution dies regardless of its current hit points.  temporary hit points have already been lost. The creature’s hit point total doesn’t drop further. Temporary hit points gained from multiple applications of the same effect don’t stack. Instead, the highest number of temporary hit points gained from that effect apply. If temporary hit points are gained from multiple, different sources that stack, keep track of those sources and when they were gained separately. Any damage taken is first subtracted from the oldest effect that granted temporary hit points. When those are gone, subtract damage from the next oldest effect, and so on. When temporary hit points are lost, they can’t be restored like normal hit points can be, even by magic.  NONLETHAL DAMAGE Sometimes a creature is clocked in a fistfight or tired out by a forced march. This sort of trauma doesn’t kill, but it can knock a creature out or make it faint.  DEALING NONLETHAL DAMAGE Certain attacks deal nonlethal damage, such as a normal human’s unarmed strike. Other factors, such as a hot environment (see page 155), can also deal nonlethal damage.  TRACKING NONLETHAL DAMAGE Nonlethal damage isn’t the same as hit point damage, so don’t deduct nonlethal damage from a creature’s current hit points. Instead, keep a running total of how much nonlethal damage a creature accumulates.  EFFECTS OF NONLETHAL DAMAGE When a creature’s nonlethal damage equals its current hit points, that creature is staggered. A creature falls unconscious when its nonlethal damage exceeds that creature’s current hit points. It doesn’t matter whether the nonlethal damage equals or exceeds a creature’s current hit points because the nonlethal damage has gone up or because that creature’s current hit points have gone down.  Staggered A staggered creature is so roughed up that it can take only a standard action or a move action in each round. A staggered creature ceases being staggered when its current hit points once again exceed its nonlethal damage.  Unconscious An unconscious creature falls to the ground, helpless. Spellcasters who fall unconscious and recover retain any spellcasting ability they had before going unconscious.  INJURY  Temporary Hit Points  72  Through magic or the use of special abilities, a creature can gain a number of hit points called temporary hit points. When a creature gains temporary hit points, note its current hit point total. If the temporary hit points go away through a means other than damage, the creature’s hit points drop to its current hit point total. If the creature has taken damage so that its hit points are equal to or lower than the noted current hit point total when the temporary hit points go away, all the  Injury isn’t hampering until it disables a creature (at 0 current hit points). When a creature is more severely injured, it might die of its wounds.  DISABLED A creature that has 0 current hit points, or one that has negative current hit points but has become stable and conscious, is disabled. A disabled creature can take a single move action or  DYING  DEAD A creature becomes dead when its current hit points are reduced to –10, its Constitution drops to 0, or it’s killed outright by massive damage or some other death-dealing effect. The creature’s soul leaves its body. Dead creatures can’t benefit from normal or magical healing, but they can be restored to life by magic. When spellcasters die, all prepared spells stored in their mind are wiped away. A dead  STABLE CREATURES AND RECOVERY Another creature can keep a dying one from losing any more hit points with a DC 15 Heal check, making the dying creature stable. If any sort of healing cures a dying creature of even 1 point of damage, that creature stops losing hit points and becomes stable. Healing that raises a dying creature’s hit points to 0 makes it conscious and disabled. Healing that raises its hit points to 1 or more makes it fully functional again. A stable creature that has been tended by a healer or that has been magically healed eventually regains consciousness and recovers hit points naturally. If the creature has no one to tend it, however, its life is still in danger.  Illus. by S. Belledin  A dying creature has –1 to –9 current hit points. It’s unconscious and can take no actions. On that creature’s initiative count each round, starting with the round in which the creature dropped below 0 hit points, it rolls d% to see whether it becomes stable. It has a 10% chance to become stable. If not, it loses 1 hit point. If a dying creature reaches –10 hit points, it’s dead.  body decays normally unless magically preserved, but magic that restores a dead creature to life also restores the body to some degree. See Reviving the Dead, page 75. In case it matters, a dead creature, no matter how it died, has –10 hit points.  INJURY, HEALING, AND DEATH  standard action each round, but not both. It can’t take full-round actions. It moves at half speed. Taking move actions doesn’t cause further injury, but performing any standard action, or any other act the DM deems strenuous, deals 1 point of damage after the completion of that act. Unless the act increased the disabled creature’s hit points, it now has negative hit points and is dying. Creatures that are not living (such as constructs, undead, and deathless) are destroyed when reduced to 0 hit points.  Recovering with Help One hour after a tended, dying creature becomes stable, roll d%. It has a 10% chance of becoming conscious, at which point it’s disabled. If it remains unconscious, it has the same chance to revive and become disabled every hour. Even if unconscious, it recovers hit points naturally. The creature is back to normal when its hit points rise to 1 or higher.     NEGATIVE ATTITUDE I have a house rule in my D&D campaign that says when a character is dying, the player of that character isn’t allowed to announce how close to death the character is. If the other party members want to know how close the dying character is to –10 hit points, one of them needs to move adjacent to the dying character and make a DC 10 Heal check as a standard action. As a DM, I get prickly when I hear a player brazenly  declare, “Hey guys, I’m down to –8 hit points, and I need someone to stabilize me before I croak!” That, folks, is called metagaming. It undermines the urgency and spoils the tension of not knowing just how much time the character has before he bites the big one. I’d rather see this knowledge revealed in an in-game context. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     73  INJURY, HEALING, AND DEATH  Recovering without Help A creature that becomes stable on its own (by making the 10% roll while dying) and that has no one to tend to it still loses hit points, just at a slower rate. It has a 10% chance each hour of becoming conscious. Each time it fails this hourly roll to become conscious, it loses 1 hit point and doesn’t recover hit points through natural healing. Once it becomes conscious and disabled, an unaided creature still doesn’t heal naturally. Instead, each day it has a 10% chance to start healing naturally (starting with the day it becomes conscious). Otherwise, it loses 1 hit point. Once an unaided creature starts recovering hit points naturally, it’s no longer in danger of losing hit points in this way.  HEALING After taking damage, a creature can recover hit points through natural healing or through magical healing. Some creatures can heal at an amazing rate. Such creatures have fast healing or regeneration.  NATURAL HEALING If, during a 24-hour period, a creature gets a full 8 hours of sleep or equivalent rest (depending on the creature’s race), that creature recovers 1 hit point per Hit Die or character level, whichever is more. Any significant interruption, such as combat, during the rest prevents healing. Complete bed rest for the entire 24 hours doubles this rate. Undertaking even light activity during a 24-hour period prevents this additional healing.  Long-Term Care Someone can help another creature double its recovery of hit points by succeeding on a DC 15 Heal check. A healer can tend up to six patients. Providing this sort of care is light activity and requires medical supplies. You can’t give long-term care to yourself.  HEALING NONLETHAL DAMAGE Nonlethal damage heals at the rate of 1 point per hour per Hit Die or character level, whichever is more. When a spell or effect cures hit point damage, it also removes an equal amount of nonlethal damage.  MAGICAL HEALING Various abilities and spells can restore hit points. Each such ability’s or spell’s description tells how the healing works.  FAST HEALING Creatures that have fast healing have the extraordinary ability to regain hit points at an exceptional rate, usually 1 or more hit points per round. Except as noted here, fast healing is like natural healing. A creature that has taken both nonlethal and lethal damage heals the nonlethal damage fi rst. Fast healing doesn’t restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, nor does it allow a creature to regrow lost body parts. Unless otherwise noted in a creature’s description, this ability doesn’t allow lost body parts to be reattached.  REGENERATION  74  Creatures that have this extraordinary ability recover from wounds quickly and can even regrow or reattach severed body  parts. Damage dealt to a creature that has this ability is treated as nonlethal damage. The creature heals nonlethal damage at a fi xed rate per round. Certain attack forms, typically fire and acid, deal a regenerating creature lethal damage, which regeneration can’t heal. An attack that can cause instant death, such as an assassin’s death attack, threatens a regenerating creature with death only if weapons that deal that creature lethal damage are used to deliver the attack. A regenerating creature that has been rendered unconscious through nonlethal damage can be killed with a coup de grace (see page 62). If the attack used to deliver a coup de grace is of a type that regeneration converts to nonlethal damage, the coup de grace fails to kill the regenerating creature. Attack forms that don’t deal hit point damage ignore regeneration. Regeneration doesn’t restore hit points lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation. Regenerating creatures can regrow lost portions of their bodies and can reattach severed limbs or body parts. Severed parts that aren’t reattached die and wither normally. A creature must have a Constitution score to have the regeneration ability.  HEALING LIMIT A creature can never recover more hit points than it has lost. Healing can’t raise a creature’s current hit points higher than its full normal hit point total.  DEATH When a living creature (any creature not of the construct, deathless, or undead type) dies, its soul departs its body, leaves the Material Plane, travels through the Astral Plane, and goes to abide on the plane where that creature’s deity resides. If the creature didn’t worship a deity, its soul departs to the plane corresponding to its alignment.  DEATH ATTACKS Some attacks and effects, known as death attacks, can kill outright. In most cases, a death attack allows the victim a Fortitude save to avoid the effect, but if the save fails, the target dies instantly. • A death attack’s victim can’t be made stable. • Raise dead doesn’t work on a death attack’s victim. • Death ward protects creatures against death attacks.  DETERMINING CAUSE OF DEATH Someone can take 10 minutes to use the Heal skill to determine what killed a dead creature, retrying as often as desired. The difficulty of this task depends on the nature of the death, as shown on the table below.  Cause of Death Cause Physical wounds Natural hazard or suffocation Spell with visible effects Poison Spell with no visible effects Condition Per day since death  DC 0 5 10 15 20  DC Modifier +5  REVIVING THE DEAD  loss as with raise dead. Resurrection can resurrect someone who has been turned into an undead creature and then destroyed. Paying someone to cast resurrection costs 910 gp (assuming a 13th-level caster) plus 10,000 gp for diamonds and holy water. True resurrection, like resurrection, can be cast on a creature that has been dead for up to 10 years per caster level. No part of the deceased is required for the spell. Casting time is 10 minutes. True resurrection restores a creature completely, with no loss of level or Constitution. This spell can also resurrect elementals or outsiders, as well as someone who has been turned into an undead creature and then destroyed. Paying someone to cast true resurrection costs 1,530 gp (assuming a 17th-level caster) plus 25,000 gp for diamonds and holy water.  Consequences of Revival Any creature brought back to life usually loses one level of experience (or one Hit Die), unless brought back with true resurrection. If the creature was 1st level or had only one Hit Die at the time of death, it permanently loses 2 points of Constitution instead of losing a level. This level loss or Constitution loss can’t be repaired by any mortal means, even wish or miracle. To regain the lost level, a revived character can earn experience through further adventuring. The revived character can improve Constitution normally using level-based ability score increases (at 4th, 8th, 12th, 16th, and 20th level).  INJURY, HEALING, AND DEATH  Bringing someone back from the dead usually means retrieving the soul and returning it to the body. Several spells have the power to restore slain creatures to life. Constructs, elementals, outsiders, and undead creatures can’t usually be returned to life. Magic can’t bring back a creature that has died of old age. Raise dead has a number of limitations. The caster can raise only creatures that have been dead up to one day per caster level. Casting time is 1 minute. The spell leaves a creature with a number of hit points equal to its Hit Dice, but the body of the raised creature must be whole—raise dead doesn’t regenerate missing body parts. A creature that died with spells prepared has a 50% chance of losing any given spell upon being raised as if that spell had been cast. A spontaneous spellcaster has a 50% chance of losing any given unused spell slot as if it had been used to cast a spell. Paying someone to cast raise dead costs 450 gp (assuming a 9th-level caster) plus 5,000 gp for diamonds. Revivify (Spell Compendium 176) brings back a dead creature if cast within 1 round of that creature’s death. Casting time is 1 standard action. It works like raise dead, with the same restrictions, except a creature suffers no level loss, no Constitution loss, and no loss of spells or spell slots. The raised creature returns to life at –1 hit point and stable. Diamonds worth 1,000 gp are required as material components. Reincarnate brings back creatures that have been dead one week or less—in entirely new bodies. Casting time is 10 minutes. The former body need not be whole, but the subject of the spell faces the normal consequences of revival (see below). Paying someone to cast reincarnate costs 280 gp (assuming a 7th-level caster) plus 1,000 gp for oils and unguents to be spread on the remains, making it the least expensive option. The drawback is that the player has no control over the form assumed, and the revived creature might no longer be welcome in civilized society. Resurrection must be cast within 10 years per caster level of the time of death. It works as long as some small portion of the creature’s body still exists. Casting time is 10 minutes. It heals the creature completely when cast, but the creature suffers the same level loss or Constitution  Preventing Revival Enemies can take steps to make it more difficult for a creature to be returned from the dead. Keeping the body prevents others from using raise dead or resurrection to restore the slain creature to life. Casting trap the soul prevents any sort of revivification unless the soul is first released.  Refusing to Be Revived A soul can’t be returned to life if it doesn’t wish to be. A soul knows the name, alignment, and patron deity of the creature attempting to return it to its body. It can refuse to return on that basis.     DEATH PENALTY I’m a strong supporter of character death, provided it unfolds naturally and heroically. I don’t endorse the deliberate killing of player characters even when they deserve it, and I don’t derive much satisfaction from ignominious or nonheroic deaths, such as when a character blunders into a death trap or is murdered in his sleep by a wandering monster. D&D campaigns benefit from the stories that arise when characters perish in glorious battle or sacrifice themselves for a great cause. They add realism to the campaign without necessarily spelling the end of it. Sadly, death isn’t the worst thing that can happen to a character in the D&D game. (That distinction falls to level loss, which totally sucks and is best avoided at all costs.) At its best, death might inspire the player to create a new character. At its worst, it’s a costly inconvenience that keeps one player out of the game until his buddies spend the party’s gold to cast a true  resurrection spell. (Raise dead and resurrection don’t cut it, folks. Save these spells for NPCs and cohorts.) In my opinion, character death became much more tolerable with the addition of the revivify spell, which first appeared in Miniatures Handbook and has since migrated to the Spell Compendium supplement. Any party that isn’t packing revivify scrolls is woefully underequipped. How does the spell work? When a character dies, the party cleric has 1 round to reach the corpse and cast this spell, restoring the character’s life with no long-term penalties. The spell gives DMs a license to build tough encounters without guilt while simultaneously arming players with the means to undo the effects of an unfortunate die roll or missed saving throw. It has made character death a fun and exciting occurrence in my D&D campaign. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     75  Invisibility The ability to move about unseen is advantageous, but it isn’t foolproof.  SENSING Invisibility makes a creature or object undetectable by vision, including darkvision. Although invisible targets can’t be seen, they can be sensed in other ways.  Spot  INVISIBILITY  An observer can notice the presence of an active invisible target within 30 feet by succeeding on a Spot check (DC = invisible creature’s Hide check +20). The observer gains a hunch that “something’s there” but can’t see it or target it accurately with an attack. An invisible creature that is holding still is very hard to notice (DC = invisible creature’s Hide check +30). An invisible inanimate object or an invisible, unliving creature holding still is nearly impossible to notice (DC 40 for an invisible object; DC = Hide check +40 for invisible creature). Treat a helpless invisible creature as an invisible inanimate object (DC 40). A Spot check that beats the DC by 20 pinpoints the invisible target’s location, but that target still benefits from total concealment.  Listen  Illus. by H. Lyon  An observer can use hearing to find an invisible target that is making any sound by making a Listen check as a free action each round. A Listen check result at least equal to the invisible creature’s Move Silently check result reveals that creature’s presence. A successful check lets an observer hear an invisible creature “over there somewhere.” A Listen check that beats the DC by 20 pinpoints the invisible creature’s location, but  the invisible creature still benefits from total concealment. In the case of an invisible object, the DM sets the DC to hear that object according to the Listen skill (see page 114).  Listen to Detect Invisible Creatures Invisible Creature Is . . . In combat or speaking Moving at up to half speed Moving at more than half speed Running or charging Some distance away Behind an obstacle (door) Behind an obstacle (stone wall)  DC 0 Move Silently check result Move Silently check result –5 Move Silently check result –20 +1 per 10 feet +5 +15  Touch An observer can feel around to find an invisible target by making a touch attack with appendages or a weapon into two adjacent 5-foot squares using a standard action. If an invisible target is in the designated area, the touch attack must hit despite that target’s total concealment. A touch attack that hits deals no damage but has successfully pinpointed the invisible target’s current location. If the invisible target then moves, its location becomes unknown again. Those struck by an invisible attacker know the location of that attacker, unless the attack came from farther away than 5 feet. In this case, the struck targets know the general location of the attacker but haven’t pinpointed the exact location. If the invisible attacker moves, its location is once again unknown.  Special Senses Some special senses thwart or more easily deal with the advantages granted by invisibility. A creature that has the scent ability can smell an invisible target as easily as a visible one. Blindsight allows a creature to interact with invisible targets as if they were visible. A creature that has the Blind-Fight feat is more effective against invisible attackers. Invisibility doesn’t thwart detect spells.  HARMING If a creature tries to attack an invisible target whose location has been pinpointed, the attack resolves normally, but the invisible target benefits from total concealment. A particularly large and slow target might get a smaller or no miss chance, at the DM’s option. If a creature tries to attack an invisible target whose location hasn’t been pinpointed, the attacker chooses the space where the attack is directed. If the invisible target is there, the attack resolves normally with the usual miss chance for total concealment. If the target isn’t there and the attacker is a PC, the DM rolls the miss chance as if the target were there, doesn’t let the player see the result, and tells that player the character has missed. That way the player doesn’t know whether the attack missed because the target isn’t there or because of the miss chance.  ATTACKS  76  An invisible attacker gains a +2 bonus on attack rolls against opponents that can’t see it. Opponents are denied  INVISIBILITY  their Dexterity bonuses to AC against an invisible attacker’s attacks. Invisible creatures can’t use gaze attacks.  ENVIRONMENT  OTHER CONSIDERATIONS A few creatures are invisible in combination with other factors. Ethereal creatures are invisible. Since ethereal creatures aren’t materially present, Spot checks, Listen checks, Scent, Blind-Fight, and blindsight don’t help locate them. Incorporeal creatures can be invisible. Blind-Fight, blindsight, and scent don’t help creatures find or attack invisible, incorporeal creatures, but Spot checks can help. Listen checks don’t help to locate an invisible, incorporeal creature unless that creature wants to be heard.  Illus. by T. Giorello  If an invisible creature picks up a visible object, that object remains visible. An invisible creature can pick up a small visible item and hide that object under clothing or in a similar place, rendering the object effectively invisible. An invisible burning torch still gives off light, as does an invisible object that has a light spell (or similar spell) cast upon it. Invisible creatures leave tracks. They can be tracked normally. Footprints in sand, mud, or other soft surfaces can give enemies clues to an invisible creature’s location.  An invisible target in the water displaces water, revealing its location. The invisible target is still hard to see and benefits from concealment.     GRELL FOOD Ah, invisibility! That secure haven. When you first gain access to it, you’re sure that no monster, no matter how foul, could possibly detect you under your warm safety blanket. Enter the grell. I was playing a rogue/fighter in a playtest of Return to the Temple of Elemental Evil, run by Dave Noonan. We had cleared the infamous moat house and reached the well room. For those who haven’t played this adventure, this room features a hole in the floor that descends into darkness. If you move through the story too slowly, which our group had, the rope for the well has been cut, although coils of it still remain at the top. The party’s decision, recommended by our wizard (played by Jesse Decker), was to cast spider climb and invisibility on my character, he being the sneakiest of our crew. I would then climb through the hole and scout out a bit. I was wary of this  plan, since I knew the fate that often befalls “scouts” in D&D. Nevertheless, I agreed and proceeded downward. I made it just far enough into the room to be more than one quick yank from safety when the grell struck. Of course, with its blindsight, it knew exactly where I was, invisibility or no. I think I made the first two saves, but failed the third. Up at the top of the well, the rope quivered, jerked once, then went slack. Who painted the big bull’s-eye on Grell Food’s back? Maybe he was doomed because he was Monkey Grip wielding a mercurial greatsword. Who knows? Mr. Noonan only smirks a bit whenever he hears this story retold—as does Jesse, now that I think about it. But the lesson I learned that day was that no matter how warm your blanket, or how well it covers you, there are things that will tear it right off you and devour you alive. —Chris Thomasson, editor     77  LANGUAGE  Language  FORGERY (INT)  In the diverse world of D&D, many languages are spoken, and it’s easy for people to learn multiple tongues. All characters can speak Common. Nonhumans also speak a racial language, and some classes give access to languages. The following table shows common languages and their alphabets. Other languages exist, spoken by particular kinds of creatures that have their own tongue. Literate characters can read and write all the languages they speak. The learned can decipher lost tongues and create codes. The unscrupulous can use written language to take advantage of others.  Languages Language (Alphabet) Abyssal (Infernal) Aquan (Elven) Auran (Draconic) Celestial (Celestial) Common (Common) Draconic (Draconic) Druidic (Druidic) Dwarven (Dwarven) Elven (Elven) Giant (Dwarven)  Language (Alphabet) Gnome (Dwarven) Goblin (Dwarven) Gnoll (Common) Halfling (Common) Ignan (Draconic) Infernal (Infernal) Orc (Dwarven) Sylvan (Elven) Terran (Dwarven) Undercommon (Elven)  DECIPHER SCRIPT (INT; TRAINED ONLY) If you’re trained in Decipher Script, you can take 1 minute to decipher writing in an unfamiliar language or a message written in an incomplete or archaic form. Tasks and DCs are delineated on the table below. The DM makes the Decipher Script check for you. If the check succeeds, you understand the general content of a piece of writing about one page long (or the equivalent). If the check fails, you must succeed on a DC 5 Wisdom check, which the DM also makes in secret, or else draw a false conclusion about the text. If you fail, you can’t try again.  Decipher Script Task Simple text Standard text Exotic or old text  DC 20 25 30  Creating a Cipher You can use the Decipher Script skill to create a private cipher by taking a week to accomplish the task. This code system allows you (or anyone with the proper key) to record information without the risk of others reading it. Only you or someone who has the proper decoding information can readily read documents you create using your private cipher. Others that have ranks in the Decipher Script skill can attempt to decipher the code. The DC for such a decoding attempt is 10 + your total skill modifier at the time that you created the cipher. The first attempt to decipher a code system requires a day of uninterrupted work, and subsequent retries each take a week.  78  Use this skill to fake documents or to detect forgeries that others try to pass off. To forge documents and detect them, you must be able to read and write the required language. Making a forgery requires writing materials appropriate to the document being forged, sufficient visual acuity to see details, wax for seals (if appropriate), and about 1 minute for a very short and simple document. A longer or more complex document takes 1d4 minutes per page. To forge a document on which the handwriting isn’t specific to a person, you need only to have seen a similar document before, and you gain a +8 bonus on your check. To forge a signature, you need an appropriate signature to copy, and you gain a +4 bonus on the check. To forge a longer document written as if by a particular person, a large sample of that person’s handwriting is needed. The Forgery check is made secretly, so that you’re not sure how good your forgery is. Your Forgery check is opposed by the Forgery check of the person who examines the document to check its authenticity. Examiners gain modifiers on their checks if any of the conditions on the Examiner Conditions table exist. A document that contradicts procedure, orders, or previous knowledge, or one that requires sacrifice from the person checking the document can increase suspicion. At the DM’s option, increased suspicion creates more favorable circumstances for the examiner’s opposing Forgery check.  Examiner Conditions Examiner . . . Only casually reviews the document Doesn’t know the handwriting Intimately knows the handwriting Doesn’t know the document type Intimately knows the document type  Check Modifier –2 –2 +2 –2 +2  A retry is never possible after a particular examiner detects a particular forgery, but the forged document might still fool someone else. The Forgery check result for a particular document must be used whenever a different examiner reads that document. No examiner can attempt to detect a particular forgery more than once. When a forgery is detected, the bearer of the forged documents often suffers legal troubles or worse.  Favorable Forgeries At the DM’s discretion, forged documents can grant a +2 circumstance bonus on a specific Bluff, Diplomacy, or Intimidate check. Unlike other bonuses, these apply only when you present the documents and the creature you’re interacting with doesn’t detect the forgery. If the forged documents are detected, the check they would have modified automatically fails.  Light and Darkness Adventurers need a way to see in the dark and dangerous places they explore. Some creatures have darkvision, but everyone else needs light to see. Light comes from various sources—see the following table for the radius that a light source illuminates and how long the source lasts.  Light Sources and Illumination Bright —1 20 ft. 15 ft. 60-ft. cone 30 ft. 30 ft. 20 ft.  Shadowy 5 ft. 40 ft. 30 ft. 120-ft. cone 60 ft. 60 ft. 40 ft.  Duration 1 hr. Permanent 6 hr./pint 6 hr./pint 6 hr./pint 6 hr. 1 hr.  Spell Continual flame Dancing lights (torches) Daylight Light  Bright 20 ft. 20 ft. (each) 60 ft. 20 ft.  Shadowy 40 ft. 40 ft. (each) 120 ft. 40 ft.  Duration Permanent 1 min.  LIGHT AND DARKNESS  Object Candle Everburning torch Lamp, common Lantern, bullseye2 Lantern, hooded Sunrod Torch  30 min. 10 min.  1 A candle doesn’t provide bright illumination, only shadowy illumination. 2 A bullseye lantern illuminates a cone, not a radius.  BRIGHT LIGHT In an area of bright light, most creatures can see clearly. A creature can’t hide in an area of bright light unless it is invisible, has concealment, or has cover. In an area of shadowy illumination, most creatures can see dimly. Creatures within this area have concealment against those who can see only dimly.  DARKNESS  Illus. by M. Zug  SHADOWY ILLUMINATION  In areas of darkness, creatures without senses that can overcome the darkness are effectively blinded.  DISTANT LIGHT In open spaces, a light source can be spotted from much farther away than its radius of illumination. An observer who succeeds on a DC 20 Spot check sees the light from a distance as indicated below, and one who fails the Spot check automatically notices the light source at half that range. Observer in Complete Darkness: A light source can be spotted at a distance equal to 20 times its radius of illumination. Observer in Dim Light: A light source can be spotted at a distance equal to 10 times its radius of illumination. Using Distant Illumination: Observers outside the illumination radius of a light source can see into the illumination just fine, making Spot checks as normal to discern creatures or objects in the illuminated area.  79  LINE OF EFFECT Illus. by W. Reynolds  Line of Effect Line of effect tells you whether an effect, such as an explosion, can reach a particular target. A line of effect is a straight, unblocked path that indicates what an ability, effect, or spell can affect. A solid barrier cancels line of effect. Fog, darkness, and other factors that limit normal sight don’t block line of effect. You must have line of effect to any target that you cast a spell on or to any space in which you wish to create an effect. You must have line of effect to the point of origin of any spell you cast, such as the center of a fireball. A burst,  cone, cylinder, or emanation spell affects only an area, creatures, or objects to which it has line of effect from its origin—a spherical burst’s center point, a cone-shaped burst’s starting point, a cylinder’s circle, or an emanation’s point of origin. An otherwise solid barrier with a hole of at least 1 square foot through it doesn’t block a spell’s line of effect. Such an opening means that the 5-foot length of wall containing the hole is no longer considered a barrier for the purpose of a spell’s line of effect.     OUT OF SIGHT? NO PROBLEM! Line of effect is a rules-y term that is related to the line of sight concept. If you can draw a straight line between the origin point of an effect (usually a spell) and the target square, then the effect can occur. This means that the effect, whether it’s a magical effect or a ranged attack, can travel unimpeded from one point to another. In many situations, line of effect is exactly like line of sight; however, there are exceptions. There’s a list of effects, such as darkness, invisibility, blindness, and similar effects that interfere with line of sight without breaking line of effect. Knowing the difference between line of effect being blocked and line of sight being blocked can matter hugely in certain situations. For example, moving into darkness will hinder most ranged attackers by imposing a 50% miss chance even if they guess the correct square to aim at. However, it will do nothing to prevent a fireball from affecting you. There is also a small set of effects, usually magical, such as wall of force, that impair line of effect but not line of sight. These effects can generally be described as transparent barriers—they  are not a barrier to sight, but physical objects and magical energy cannot pass through them. Even a simple glass window can block line of effect but still allow line of sight, although of course it might be relatively simple to disable such a fragile barrier and restore line of effect. One of the most important parts of understanding the line of effect rules, and therefore making correct decisions during combat encounters, is how to determine the point of origin of an effect. For ranged attacks and other effects that originate from a creature, the point of origin is any corner of any square that the creature occupies. For area effects, such as fireball, the line of effect originates from the corner of any square within the spell’s range. One of the most important implications of this rule is that many creatures can use well-placed area spells and abilities to effectively reach foes hidden around corners or behind total cover, because the area defined by the effect traces line of effect from its point of origin rather than from the creature itself. —Jesse Decker, D&D Development Manager     80  Line of Sight  LINE OF SIGHT  Line of sight establishes whether you can see something else represented on the battle grid. Presupposing you can see, determine line of sight by drawing an imaginary line between your space and the target’s space. If any such line isn’t blocked, then you have line of sight to the target, and if it’s a creature, it has line of sight to you. The line isn’t blocked if it doesn’t intersect or even touch squares that block line of sight. If you have line of sight on a target, you can see to cast a targeted spell on it, shoot it with a bow, and so forth. If  Illus. by M. Phillippi  you can see a portion of a large creature that occupies more than one square, you can target that creature for a spell or any other attack. If you can’t see the target, such as due to being blinded or the target’s invisibility, you can’t have line of sight to it even if you could draw an unblocked line between your space and the target’s. If line of sight to a target is completely blocked, you can’t cast spells or use other abilities that require line of sight to the target. When line of sight is blocked by something that doesn’t otherwise physically block or prevent an attack that doesn’t require line of sight (such as fog), you can still make that attack, but your target is treated as if it were invisible (see page 76). If line of sight is partially blocked, such as by the corner of a building, attacks work normally, but the target’s AC increases due to the cover.     WHAT YOU SEE IS WHAT YOU GET Three rules that can easily save your character’s life go handin-hand. The rules for line of sight, cover, and line of effect are all closely related, and using them well can make a huge difference in whether or not your character survives an encounter. All three of these rules are related to your character’s position on the battlefield, and understanding them well can make the tactical decisions that you face during combat encounters more interesting. The first step, of course, is to be able to quickly and accurately determine lines of sight on the battlefield. If two creatures can trace at least one clear straight line from any part of one creature’s space to any part of the other creature’s space, the creatures have line of sight to one another. Effects such as blindness, darkness, or invisibility naturally create conditions under which no line of sight is possible, even if you can find a clear line between the squares in question. Although it’s a straightforward exercise most of the time, line of sight issues can slow the game during some of the most  exciting moments of play if you’re not prepared. By far, the easiest way to resolve line of sight issues quickly and accurately is to simply carry a piece of string in your dice bag. Those zip-line key chains work great too, since they’re extremely portable, easy to fish out of a dice bag, and usually cheap or free to acquire. Emphasizing your own speed and preparedness when dealing with these rules keeps the focus on the interesting decisions presented by the combat encounter, and away from the minutiae of the rules. The goal, whether you’re a player trying to preserve your character or a DM attempting to run intelligent monsters well, is to have clear lines of sight for your own ranged attacks while preventing your foes from targeting you or, at the least, gaining the defensive bonuses from cover. Mastering these rules makes combat run faster, and being able to quickly assess the advantageous positions on a battlefield leads to more movement and more interesting combats, no to mention taking less damage from many attacks. —Jesse Decker, D&D Development Manager     81  Magic Items Magic items are vitally important in the D&D game. This section discusses the rules needed to use them.  IDENTIFYING AN ITEM When PCs find magic items as treasure, they need to determine what the items do. The following methods are available to identify magic items.  MAGIC ITEMS  SKILLS Certain skills allow a creature to identify an item.  SPELLS Spells are the most reliable way to identify items.  Detect Magic The easiest way for creatures to discern whether an object is magical is to use detect magic. The process for this is covered above in the Spellcraft skill option for identifying a magic item.  Knowledge (Arcana) A successful DC 30 Knowledge (arcana) check means a creature learned of an item at one point during past studies. Such a success might give a hint to the item’s function or reveal every detail about it. This method is most appropriate for legendary items or items that have a traditional shape associated with their function.  Search Close study of an item might provide some information. A command word could be etched in tiny letters on the inside of a ring, or a feathered design might hint that an item allows its wearer to fly. In such a case, a successful DC 15 Search check reveals the clue.  Illus. by D. Martin  Spellcraft A creature using the detect magic spell can attempt a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + 1/2 the item’s caster level) to determine the school (or schools) of the highest-level spell (or spells) involved in the item’s creation, as well as the strength of the item’s aura (faint to overwhelming, based on its caster level). If the creature exceeds the DC for this check by 10 or more, that creature magically divines the item’s functions, its means of activation, and the number of charges remaining. A creature can also use Spellcraft to identify potions. The DC is 25, the check takes 1 minute, and it can’t be retried on a failure.  Use Magic Device If a creature succeeds on a Use Magic Device check to activate a magic item and exceeds the DC by 5 or more, that creature magically divines the item’s functions, its means of activation, and the number of charges remaining.  BARDIC KNOWLEDGE  82  many items like it are in circulation, the DC is 25. If the item is known only in legend, the DC is 30 or higher. A successful result should reveal something of the item’s history and give at least a hint about the item’s function.  Although not quite as useful as the skills discussed above, a successful bardic knowledge check might reveal the backgrounds, functions, and means of activating legendary or otherwise well-known items. If the item is standard equipment for a well-known faction or person, the DC is 20. If the item is uncommon or ancient, but  Identify The identify spell (PH 243) determines the functions, means of activation, and number of charges remaining for any item of less than artifact power. It takes an hour to cast and has an expensive material component, but it’s also a sure way to identify most magic items.  Analyze Dweomer The analyze dweomer spell (PH 197) functions like identify, but its casting time is shorter, it has a focus rather than an expensive material component, and the caster can determine the properties of several items with one casting of the spell. This spell is the swiftest and surest way to identify many magic items.  HIRED HELP The PCs might want to consult bards, sages, or high-level spellcasters to identify items. Such NPCs might also know some details or rumors about an item’s history. They always want something in return for this information, and they  charge standard prices for spells they cast (see page 69). If an NPC can identify the item without using spells, that character might still ask for payment equivalent to the cost of casting identify (100 gp + 10 gp per level). Of course, an NPC might instead demand some service or trade.  DM EXPLANATION  TRIAL AND ERROR The trial-and-error process usually entails a PC attempting to use the item. As long as everyone finds this to be a fun method, it’s fine. If, however, the players turn it into a tedious checklist of tests, it’s reasonable for the DM to rule that until a creature has determined a magic item’s powers, command word, or other secrets in one of the manners noted above, no amount of crazy experimentation helps.  USING AN ITEM When a creature wants to use a magic item that has already been identified, the first consideration is whether that creature can use the item at all. To do so, the creature must usually have available body slots and be of appropriate size and shape. The second consideration is the item’s method of activation.  BODY SLOTS A normal humanoid creature has twelve body slots, enumerated here with some examples of the kinds of items that might be worn there (for nonhumanoid creatures, see Size and Shape on the next page). Arms: Armbands, bracelets, bracers. Body: Armor, robes. Face: Goggles, lenses, masks, spectacles, third eyes. Feet: Boots, sandals, shoes, slippers. Hands: Gauntlets, gloves. Head: Circlets, crowns, hats, headbands, helmets, phylacteries. Rings (2 slots): Rings. Shoulders: Capes, cloaks, mantles, shawls.  MAGIC ITEMS  It might be simpler for the DM to tell the players what an item is. This approach is particularly useful when the item provides a bonus that must be tracked on actions the PC is already taking.  Throat: Amulets, badges, brooches, collars, medals, medallions, necklaces, pendants, periapts, scarabs, scarfs, torcs. Torso: Shirts, tunics, vests, vestments. Waist: Belts, girdles, sashes. Each body slot can accommodate only a single active magic item. Additional magic items could be worn in the same body slot, but only the first-worn item confers its magical abilities upon the wearer. Some body slots are described as a matched pair of body parts. If an item uses one of these body slots, it takes up both “halves” of the body slot even if worn on only one of the pair. For example, a glove of storing takes up the entire hands body slot, even though it’s only one glove. Similarly, items that come in pairs must be worn together to function. Some items—particularly those that have a limited number of uses per day—indicate that they must be worn for a certain length of time before they can be used. This attunement period prevents creatures from treating them as disposable tools to be donned and stowed repeatedly throughout the day.  NONWORN MAGIC ITEMS Some magic items aren’t worn on the body, but are instead carried or held by the owner to gain their benefit. Such items function or can be activated as long as they’re carried somewhere on the body—but not if stored in an extradimensional or nondimensional storage space, such as a bag of holding. An item’s description might delineate a particular manner in which you must carry it for it to function (such as an ioun stone).  SIZE AND SHAPE Most creatures have all the normal body slots available. Creatures never gain extra body slots for having extra body parts. For unusual cases, here are some guidelines.  Armor As long as you’re the same size category and the same general shape as the armor’s original owner, the armor functions normally for you. However, inappropriately sized or shaped armor can’t be worn. Armor doesn’t resize to fit a wearer of a different size category, nor does armor constructed for a humanoid-shaped creature fit a nonhumanoid-shaped creature. In cases where a nonhumanoid-shaped creature     A WAND BY ANY OTHER NAME Potions, scrolls, wands, and staffs offer little room for differentiating items by appearance. As a result, they can seem generic or pedestrian. For a change of pace, reinvent these items in new shapes and sizes. Just boil the function down to its most basic state, then imagine other forms that could accomplish that function. A potion or scroll is basically just a one-shot spell, but it need not always be liquid in a vial or words on a page. Magically altered fruit, herbal infusions, or atomizers can deliver the same effect as a potion but with a new feel. Breaking a runic tile or touching an elaborate tattoo to activate its one “dose” of power doesn’t feel like reading a piece of parchment, but the end result is pretty much the same.  A wand could take the form of an orb, a rune-crusted skull, or even a weapon. That staff could become a tome with a few spells within, or a musical instrument requiring a certain chord for each of its spells. These variations can, but don’t have to, include minor changes in rules as well. For example, maybe that lyre of frost requires its user to have a rank of Perform (string instruments) in order for it to function. It’s easy to overwhelm players with variety, so don’t just change everything in one fell swoop. Introduce one or two new item shapes in your game and see if the players enjoy trying them out, then slowly expand the range of options and rule variations. —Andy Collins, developer     83  tries to wear armor created for another nonhumanoid, the DM should use his best judgment.  Shields Shields don’t change size to match the wielder. You can’t use an inappropriately sized shield.  MAGIC ITEMS  Weapons Weapons don’t change size to match the wielder. You can wield an inappropriately sized weapon with a penalty (see Inappropriately Sized Weapons, page 151). Regardless of a weapon’s size, as long as you can hold a weapon you can activate its magical abilities.  Nonhumanoid Creatures Creatures that lack any clear shape have no body slots and can’t wear magic items at all. Armless Creatures: Creatures that have no forelimbs don’t have the arms, hands, or rings body slot—but see Multilegged Creatures, below. A creature that has only a single forelimb retains these body slots and can wear both items of a pair on the same limb. Fingerless Creatures: Creatures that lack flexible digits or extremities lack the rings body slot. A creature need not be able to manipulate objects to wear rings. Headless Creatures: Creatures that do not have an identifiable head lack the face, head, and throat body slots. Legless Creatures: Creatures that have no hind limbs don’t have the feet body slot. Multilegged Creatures: Creatures that have more than two legs can treat their foremost pair of limbs as their arms, allowing them access to the arms, hands, and rings body slots, even if those limbs are used for locomotion rather than for manipulation. Creatures that have arms as well as multiple legs lack no body slots.  ACTIVATING MAGIC ITEMS Some items, once donned, function continuously. Others apply their properties or powers when used as part of another action. In many cases, using an item requires it to be activated with an action of some kind. You can’t activate an item that you don’t properly possess, hold, or wear. Some items merely require that you carry them on your person but not specifically worn in a slot or carried in a hand. Some magic items store metamagic spells. You don’t need the metamagic feat to activate an item storing a metamagic version of a spell. Activation methods are delineated here, but the details of a particular item’s description supersede these general rules. If no activation method is given either in the item’s description or by the nature of the item, assume that a command word is needed to activate it.  Command  84  Command activation means that a user speaks a command word and the item activates. No other special knowledge is needed. The command word can be a real word, but when this is the case, the user runs the risk of activating the item accidentally by speaking the word in normal conversation. More often, the command word is a nonsensical word, or a word or phrase from a language no longer in common use.  A user can’t activate a command item in the area of a silence spell or if unable to speak. Activating a command item takes the same amount of time as the casting time of the spell that the item’s power duplicates. If the power doesn’t duplicate a spell, activating the item is a standard action unless its description says otherwise. Command activation doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity.  Continuously Functioning Continuously functioning items are usually items that a creature wears. A few must simply be carried, while others are tools or weapons that provide an enhancement bonus on certain checks or rolls. Such items don’t need to be activated. It takes at least a standard action that provokes attacks of opportunity to don an item of this sort, but it might take longer, such as with magic armor.  Manipulation Activating this type of item requires some physical manipulation of it, such as placing an immovable rod or pulling a patch from a robe of useful items. This movement is similar to the somatic component of a spell in that you need a free hand to perform the manipulation. Most manipulation items require a standard action to manipulate, but an item’s description might indicate another type of action. Activating a manipulation item as a move action, a standard action, or a full-round action provokes attacks of opportunity. A successful attack or grapple check against the user of such an item forces a Concentration check. If the user fails this check, he can’t use the item. Oils and Potions: Any corporeal creature can use a potion or an oil, both of which are manipulation items that take a standard action to use. A creature can carefully administer a potion to an unconscious creature as a full-round action, trickling the liquid down the creature’s throat. It takes a full-round action to apply an oil to an unconscious creature.  Mental This type of item merely requires that the user will it to function, so activating the item is a purely mental act. A user can activate the item in the area of a silence spell, while grappled, while paralyzed, and so on, as long he has control of his thoughts. A user can’t use a mentally activated item if dominated, unconscious, sleeping, turned to stone, or otherwise incapable of conscious independent thought. However, someone dominating a user could make that user use a mentally activated item or give the user free rein to use it within the bounds of other instructions. Activating a mental activation item takes the same amount of time as the casting time of the spell that the item’s power duplicates. If the power doesn’t duplicate a spell, activating the item is a standard action unless its description says otherwise. Mental activation doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity.  Spell Completion This is the activation method for scrolls. A scroll is a spell or collection of spells that has been stored, mostly finished, in written form. All that’s left to do is perform the finishing  If the user meets all the requirements, and his caster level is at least equal to the spell’s caster level, he can activate the spell without a check. If he meets all three requirements but his caster level is lower than the scroll spell’s caster level, he must succeed on a caster level check (see Caster Level Checks, page 31; DC = scroll’s caster level + 1) to activate the scroll. If he fails, he must succeed on a DC 5 Wisdom check to avoid a mishap (see below). Unlike with normal checks, a natural roll of 1 always fails, whatever the modifiers. If the Wisdom check succeeds, the scroll doesn’t activate but remains intact. Effect: A spell successfully activated from a scroll works exactly like a spell cast the normal way. If the scroll spell’s  • A surge of uncontrolled magical energy deals 1d6 points of damage per spell level to the user. • The spell strikes the user or an ally instead of the intended target, or a random target nearby if the user was the intended recipient. • The spell takes effect at some random location within spell range. • The spell’s effect on the target is contrary to the spell’s normal effect. • The scroll user suffers some minor but bizarre effect related to the spell in some way. Most such effects should last only as long as the original spell’s duration, or 2d10 minutes for instantaneous spells. • Some innocuous items appear in the spell’s area. • The spell has a delayed effect. Sometime within the next 1d12 hours, the spell activates. If the scroll user was the intended recipient, the spell takes effect normally. If the user wasn’t the intended recipient, the spell goes off in the general direction of the original recipient or target, up to the spell’s maximum range, if the target has moved away.  Spell Trigger To use a spell trigger item, the user must first know what spell the item stores (unless he is activating the item blindly using Use Magic Device). Activating the item requires the user to have the spell stored in the item on his spell list and to speak a word. Even a character who can’t cast the spell stored in the item can use it from a spell trigger item as long as that spell is on his spell list. This is the case even for a member of a class that eventually grants spells but who can’t actually cast spells yet, such as a 3rd-level paladin. A domain spell is on a user’s spell list only if the user has access to that domain. Activating a spell trigger item takes the same amount of time as the casting time of the spell that the item stores, but activating the item doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. You can’t activate a spell trigger item in the area of a silence spell or if unable to speak. Staffs and Wands: To activate a staff or wand, the user must hold the item toward the target or area in a hand or similar appendage. A wand can be used while the user is grappling, but a staff can’t.  Illus. by P. Bergting  • The spell must be of the correct type—arcane or divine. Arcane spellcasters can use only scrolls that contain arcane spells, and divine spellcasters can use only scrolls that contain divine spells. • The user must have the spell on his class list. • The user must have the requisite ability score.  caster level is unknown, assume the caster level is the minimum level required to cast the spell for the creature that scribed the scroll (usually twice the spell’s level, –1). A spell on a scroll can be used only once. The writing vanishes from the scroll when the spell is activated. Mishap: When a mishap occurs, the spell on the scroll is wasted and has a harmful effect determined by the DM. Possible mishaps are given here.  MAGIC ITEMS  parts of the spellcasting. Using a scroll properly involves several steps and conditions. Decipher: The writing on a scroll must be deciphered before someone can use it or know exactly what spell it contains. Doing this requires a read magic spell or a successful Spellcraft check (DC 20 + spell level). Deciphering a scroll to determine its contents doesn’t activate it unless it’s a specially prepared cursed scroll. A creature can decipher the writing on a scroll in advance. Activate: Activating a scroll requires reading the spell from the scroll. The user must be able to see and read the writing on the scroll. Using a scroll’s spell requires no material components or focus, and its caster level is set, but the user determines the specifics of the effect. Activating a scroll takes the same amount of time as the casting time of the spell stored on the scroll and provokes attacks of opportunity as spellcasting does. Concentration is required, and activating a scroll is subject to disruption just as casting a spell is. Using a scroll is like casting a spell for the purpose of arcane spell failure. A user can’t activate a scroll if he would be prevented from casting the spell it contains, such as casting a spell that has verbal components in the area of a silence spell. Activation Requirements: To have any chance of activating a scroll, the user must meet the following requirements.  85  Staffs use the wielder’s relevant ability score and relevant feats to set the DC for saves against their spells. Unlike with other sorts of magic items, the wielder can use his caster level when activating a staff if that caster level is higher than the staff’s. He can also use Spell Penetration and Greater Spell Penetration to overcome spell resistance when using spells cast from a staff.  LIMITED USES MAGIC ITEMS  Not all magic items allow unlimited use of their powers.  Charged and Single-Use Some items have a limited number of uses or charges before their powers are permanently depleted. Others function only a single time. After you use up the last charge or use of one of these items, it becomes a nonmagical object. Partially depleted charged items can’t be recharged.  Activate Blindly Some magic items are activated by special words, thoughts, or deeds. You can activate such an item as if you were using the activation word, thought, or deed, even when you’re not and even if you don’t know exactly what to do. You do have to perform some equivalent activity to make the check. You get a special +2 bonus on your Use Magic Device check if you’ve activated the item in question at least once before. If you fail by 9 or less, you can’t activate the device. If you fail by 10 or more, you suffer a mishap. A mishap means that magical energy gets released but it doesn’t do what you wanted it to do. The default mishaps are that the item affects the wrong target or that uncontrolled magical energy is released, dealing 2d6 points of damage to you. This mishap is in addition to the chance for a mishap that you normally run when you cast a spell from a scroll that you couldn’t otherwise cast yourself.  Daily-Use Items Many magic items have a limited number of uses per day. When the last of these uses is used, that power is no longer available for the day, but the item is still magical and might have other powers available. Unless otherwise noted in an item’s description, any item that has daily uses regains all those uses at dawn each day.  USE MAGIC DEVICE (CHA, TRAINED ONLY) If you’re trained in this skill, you can use it to read spells and activate magic items as if you had the spell ability or class features of another class, as if you were a different race, or as if you were of a different alignment. You make a Use Magic Device check each time you activate a magic item as part of the action required to activate that item. If you’re using the check to emulate an alignment or some other quality in an ongoing manner, you need to make the relevant Use Magic Device check once per hour. You can’t take 10 with this skill. Nobody else can use aid another to help you. If you ever roll a natural 1 while attempting to activate an item and you fail, then you can’t try to activate that item again for 24 hours. You can otherwise try to activate an item as often as you like. If emulating an attribute, you must consciously choose which requirement to emulate. That is, you must know what you’re trying to emulate when you make a Use Magic Device check for that purpose. The DCs for various tasks involving Use Magic Device checks are summarized on the following table.  Use Magic Device Task Activate blindly Decipher written spell Emulate ability score Emulate class feature Emulate race Emulate alignment Use scroll Use wand  86  DC 25 25 + spell level 15 + ability score 20 25 30 20 + caster level 20  Decipher Written Spell This works just like deciphering a written spell with the Spellcraft skill, except that the DC is 5 points higher. Deciphering a written spell requires 1 minute of concentration.  Emulate Ability Score To cast a spell from a scroll, you need a high score in the appropriate ability (Intelligence for wizard spells, Wisdom for divine spells, or Charisma for sorcerer or bard spells). Your effective ability score, appropriate to the class you’re emulating when you try to cast the spell from the scroll, is your Use Magic Device check result –15. If you already have a high enough score in the appropriate ability, you don’t need to make this check.  Emulate Alignment Some magic items have positive or negative effects based on the user’s alignment. Use Magic Device lets you use these items as if you were of an alignment of your choice. You can emulate only one alignment at a time.  Emulate Class Feature Sometimes you need to use a class feature to activate a magic item. In this case, your effective level in the emulated class equals your Use Magic Device check result –20. This skill doesn’t let you actually use the class feature of another class. It just lets you activate items as if you had that class feature. If the class whose feature you’re emulating has an alignment requirement, you must meet it, either honestly or by emulating an appropriate alignment with a separate Use Magic Device check. You can use the skill in this way to make a caster level check with an item. Your effective caster level is your check result –20. See Caster Level Checks, page 31.  Emulate Race Some magic items work only for members of certain races, or work better for members of those races. You can use such an item as if you were a race of your choice. You can emulate only one race at a time.  Use Scroll  MAGIC ITEMS  If you’re casting a spell from a scroll, you have to decipher it fi rst. Normally, to cast a spell from a scroll, you must have the scroll’s spell on your class spell list. Use Magic Device allows you to use a scroll as if you had a particular spell on your class spell list. The DC is equal to 20 + the caster level of the spell you’re trying to cast from the scroll. In addition, casting a spell from a scroll requires a minimum score (10 + spell level) in the appropriate ability score. If you don’t have a sufficient score in that ability, you must emulate the ability score with a separate Use Magic Device check. Using a scroll still has a mishap chance as normal. This use of the skill also applies to other spell completion magic items.  Use Wand Normally, to use a wand, you must have the wand’s spell on your class spell list. This use of the skill allows you to use a wand as if you had a particular spell on your class spell list. Using the skill in this way also applies to other spell trigger magic items, such as staffs.  RESOLVING MAGIC ITEM EFFECTS  Caster Level Each item’s description indicates a caster level. This caster level is used to determine the parameters of a spell that the item duplicates, such as range, duration, and so on. It’s also used to determine DCs for spells such as dispel magic. If an item doesn’t mention a caster level, assume the caster level is equal to the minimum caster level required for the highest-level spell given as a prerequisite for the item. For an item that has only an enhancement bonus  and no other properties, the caster level is three times the enhancement bonus.  Illus. by S. Ellis  A magic item’s description either specifically details its effect when activated or refers you to a particular spell, power, class feature, or other entry to learn the effect. The item’s description always supersedes the spell, power, class feature, or other source that the item mimics. Don’t assume that just because a spell is a prerequisite that the item necessarily replicates that spell—in many cases, the spell is simply the closest reasonable effect to the item’s power.  Save DCs Most item descriptions indicate the save DC for the item’s powers. In cases where the save DC isn’t given, the DC is 10 + (1-1/2 × the level of the spell or effect). This assumes that the item has the minimum ability score required to cast the spell. Staffs and runestaffs (Magic Item Compendium 223) are exceptions to this rule. Treat the saving throw DCs for these items as if the user had cast the spell, including caster level and all modifiers to the save DC.  Stacking Effects Item effects stack just as spells do (see Stacking Effects, page 137).  87  Mounted Combat Riding a mount into battle gives you several advantages.  MOUNTED COMBAT  RIDE (DEX) You can ride many creatures that are suitable as mounts. If you attempt to ride a creature that is ill suited as a mount, you take a –5 penalty on your Ride checks. Riding a mount without a saddle also imposes a –5 penalty on your Ride checks. Typical riding maneuvers don’t require checks. You can saddle, mount, ride, and dismount from a mount without a problem. The table below shows common tasks, their DCs, and the time it takes to perform them.  Enter Water Failure on a Ride check to enter the water on a land mount means the mount refuses to enter the water. If you fail by 5 or more, the land mount balks, throwing you into the water while it stays ashore. If you’re riding an aquatic mount, failure means you take a –5 penalty on your next Ride check to stay astride the swimming mount. Failure by 5 or more means you’re unsaddled as your mount enters the water.  Guide with Knees You can guide your mount with your knees so that you can use both hands in combat. Make your Ride check at the start of your turn. If you fail, you can use only one hand in this round because you need to use the other to control your mount.  Ride Task No Action Cover Enter water Guide with knees Leap Soft fall Stay in saddle Swim while mounted  DC 15 10 5 15 15 5 See text  Free Action Fast mount or dismount Fight as war mount attacks Move Action Control nonwar mount in battle Spur mount 1 Armor check penalty applies.  201 10 20 15  NO ACTION These riding tasks don’t require an action to perform.  Cover You can drop down and hang alongside your mount, using it as cover. Make the Ride check before the opponent makes its attack roll. If multiple opponents are attacking on the same initiative count, make one Ride check to see if you have cover from all those opponents’ attacks. You can’t claim this sort of cover while attacking, casting spells, or charging, and you can’t attack, cast spells, or charge while using your mount as cover. If you fail, you don’t get the benefit of cover.  Leap You can get your mount to leap obstacles as part of its movement. Use your Ride modifier or the mount’s Jump modifier, whichever is lower, to see how far the creature can jump. If you fail, you fall off the mount when it leaps and take the appropriate falling damage (at least 1d6 points).  Soft Fall You can try to take no damage when you fall off a mount. If you fail, you take 1d6 points of damage from the fall.  Stay in Saddle You can try to avoid falling when your mount rears or bolts unexpectedly, or when you take damage.  Swim while Mounted Each round your mount swims, make a Ride check to stay mounted. The DC is 10 for calm water, 15 for rough water or underwater, and 20 for stormy water. If you fail, your mount swims at half speed and takes a –5 penalty on Swim checks until you succeed on another Ride check. If you fail by 5 or more, you’re unsaddled. Getting mounted again requires a successful Swim check at the appropriate DC for the water and Ride check at that same DC.  FREE ACTION These riding tasks require a free action to perform.  Fast Mount or Dismount You can attempt to quickly mount or dismount from a mount up to one size category larger than yourself, provided that you still have a move action available that round. If you fail, mounting or dismounting is a move action.     MOUNTED MATTERS During an early 3e playtest of the FORGOTTEN REALMS adventure Into the Dragon’s Lair, I played a 10th-level paladin with the Mounted Combat and Spirited Charge feats. The beginning part of the adventure provides for plenty of outdoor travel and exploration, so I was able to make good use of my warhorse. While exploring the Stormhorn Mountains, we ran into a blue dragon that attacked Skip Williams’s wizard and mauled him  severely. Naturally, I spurred my warhorse in a glorious charge and attacked! I rolled a 20 and confirmed the critical hit—so, with my Spirited Charge feat, I wound up scoring triple damage. I distinctly recall dishing out 63 points of damage to the dragon in one mighty blow. That dragon abruptly lost interest in Skip’s wizard and abandoned the field, never to trouble us again. —Rich Baker, designer     88  Fight as War Mount Attacks If you direct your war-trained mount to attack in battle, you can still make your attacks normally.  MOVE ACTION These riding tasks require a move action to perform.  Spur Mount  Control Nonwar Mount in Battle You can attempt to control a mount not trained for combat while riding it in battle. If you fail, the move action becomes a full-round action, and you can’t do anything else until your next turn.  MOVING If your mount moves more than 5 feet, you can make only a single melee attack. Essentially, you have to wait until the mount gets to your enemy before attacking, so you can’t make a full attack. Even at your mount’s full speed, you don’t take any penalty on melee attacks while mounted. You can take your own move actions normally, so that, for instance, you can load and fire a light crossbow during a round while your mount is moving.  RIDER UNCONSCIOUS If you’re knocked unconscious, you have a 50% chance to stay in the saddle (75% if you’re in a military saddle). Otherwise you fall and take 1d6 points of damage. Without you to guide it, your mount avoids combat.  COMBAT WHILE MOUNTED Your mount acts on your initiative count as you direct it. The mount uses its action to move, and you move along with it. When you’re mounted, you share your mount’s space completely. Multiple riders share their mount’s space completely as well.  OVERRUN  CHARGING If your mount charges, you also take the AC penalty associated with a charge. If you make an attack at the end of the charge, you receive the bonus gained from the charge.  HIGHER GROUND When you attack a creature that is on foot and smaller than your mount, you receive a +1 bonus on melee attack rolls  Illus. by W. Reynolds  If you attempt an overrun while mounted, your mount makes the Strength check to determine the success or failure of the overrun, and it applies its size modifier rather than yours. If you knock the defender prone with the overrun, your mount can make a single attack against that creature. The attack must be made with a natural weapon that is on the mount’s front feet, and it can’t be a special attack. If the mount has no natural weapons on its feet, it can’t make this sort of attack during an overrun.  CASTING SPELLS You can cast a spell normally if your mount moves only its speed or less either before or after you cast. If you have your mount double move, it’s moving both before and after you cast. You’re then casting the spell while the mount is moving, and you have to make a Concentration check due to the vigorous motion (DC 10 + spell level) or lose the spell. If you have your mount run, you cast when it has moved up to twice its speed, but your Concentration check is more difficult due to the violent motion (DC 15 + spell level).  MOUNTED COMBAT  You can spur your mount to greater speed. A successful Ride check increases the mount’s speed by 10 feet for 1 round but deals 1 point of damage to the creature. You can use this ability every round, but each consecutive round of additional speed deals twice as much damage to the mount as the previous round.  for being on higher ground. You receive the same bonus if the DM determines you’re higher than your target for some other reason.  SHOOTING If your mount moves only its speed or less, you take no penalty on ranged attack rolls. You can use ranged weapons while your mount is taking a double move, but with a –4 penalty on attack rolls. If your mount is running, you take a –8 penalty instead. In either of these latter two cases, you make the attack rolls when your mount has completed half its movement, measuring range from that point. You can make a full attack with a ranged weapon while your mount is moving.  89  Movement Movement during battle, exploration, and travel is an essential part of the D&D game. Where you can move, how long it takes you to get there, and whether you’re vulnerable to attacks of opportunity while you’re moving are key questions during combat.  MOVEMENT  ON THE GRID During combat, movement occurs on the battle grid. A square on the battle grid is 1 inch across, representing a 5-foot-by5-foot area. Miniatures or other tokens are used to represent and track creatures as they move.  SPEED Your speed is determined by your race and your encumbrance. Your speed while unarmored is your base land speed.  Encumbrance A creature encumbered by carrying a large amount of weight might move slower than normal. See Encumbrance, page 47.  Bonuses to Speed Always apply any modifiers to a creature’s speed before adjusting that creature’s speed based on armor or encumbrance. Multiple bonuses of the same type to a creature’s speed don’t stack.  MOVEMENT MODES You can move your speed as a move action during your turn and still take a standard action. You can use your standard action to move your speed again. In either case, you’re considered to be hustling—if you walk, it takes a full-round action just to move your speed. When you’re moving, you might choose to run, or you might take part or all of your movement in some other mode. Your options are described in this section.  5-Foot Step As long as your movement isn’t hampered or prohibited, you can move 5 feet during a turn when you don’t take any other kind of movement. If you can take a 5-foot step, you can take it before, during, or after your other actions during your turn. Taking this 5-foot step never provokes attacks of opportunity. You can’t take more than one 5-foot step in a round. Any creature that has a speed of 5 feet or lower can’t take a 5-foot step, since moving even 5 feet requires a move action for such a slow creature. You can’t take a 5-foot step using a movement mode for which you don’t have a natural speed. A natural speed is given in a race’s or creature’s description with a noted amount of movement.  Balance (Dex; Armor Check Penalty) A successful Balance check lets you use a move action to move up to half your speed along a precarious surface. If you accept a –5 penalty, you can move your full speed as a move action. You can try to run across a narrow surface by accepting a –20 penalty on your Balance check. On a narrow surface or  90  a difficult surface, a failure by 4 or less means you can’t move for 1 round. A failure by 5 or more means you fall. The DC of the Balance check varies with the surface, as detailed on the following table.  Balance Narrow Surface 7–12 inches wide 2–6 inches wide Less than 2 inches wide  DC 10 15 20  Difficult Surface Uneven flagstone Hewn stone floor Sloped or angled floor Moving surface Violently moving surface  DC 101 101 102 10 15  Surface Modifiers DC Modifier3 Lightly obstructed (scree, light debris) +2 Severely obstructed (natural cavern floor, heavy debris) +5 Lightly slippery (wet floor) +2 Severely slippery (ice sheet) +5 Sloped or angled +2 1 Only if running or charging. Failure by 4 or less means the creature can’t run or charge, but can otherwise act normally. 2 As note 2, except the modifier for a sloped or angled surface does not apply. 3 These modifiers stack.  Being Attacked while Balancing: You’re considered flatfooted while balancing. If you have 5 or more ranks in Balance, you aren’t considered flat-footed while balancing. If you take damage while balancing, you must succeed on another Balance check against the same DC or fall prone.  Burrow A creature that has a natural burrow speed can tunnel at its noted speed through dirt, but not through rock unless its descriptive text says otherwise. Creatures can’t charge or run while burrowing. Most burrowing creatures don’t leave behind tunnels other creatures can use, either because the material they tunnel through fills in behind them or because they don’t actually dislocate any material when burrowing. Creatures that don’t have a natural burrow speed can’t burrow at all.  Climb (Str; Armor Check Penalty) If you don’t have a natural climb speed, you can use a move action to climb at up to one-quarter of your speed by making an appropriate Climb check. With a successful Climb check, you can advance up, down, or across a slope, a wall, or some other steep incline. A slope is considered to be any incline at an angle measuring less than 60 degrees; a wall is any incline at an angle measuring 60 degrees or more. A Climb check that fails by 4 or less means that you make no progress, and one that fails by 5 or more means that you fall from whatever height you have already attained.  The DC of the check depends on the conditions of the climb. Compare the task with those on the following table to determine an appropriate DC.  Climb  Example Surface or Activity DC Modifier1 Climbing a chimney (artificial or natural) or other location where you can brace against opposite walls –10 Climbing a corner where you can brace against a perpendicular wall –5 Climbing at half speed instead of one-quarter speed +5 Climbing at normal speed +20 Climbing while retaining Dexterity bonus to AC +20 Surface is slippery +5 1 These modifiers stack.  Taking Other Actions while Climbing: You need both hands free to climb, but you can cling to a wall with one hand while you cast a spell or perform some other act that requires only one hand. Being Attacked while Climbing: While climbing, you can’t move to avoid a blow, so you’re denied your Dexterity bonus to AC. You also can’t use a shield. Any time you take damage while climbing, make a Climb check against the DC of the slope or wall. Failure means you fall from your current height and sustain the appropriate falling damage (see page 52). Making Handholds and Footholds: You can make handholds and footholds by pounding pitons into a wall. Doing so takes 1 minute per piton, and one piton is needed per 3 feet of distance. In the same way, a climber with a handaxe or similar tool can cut handholds in an ice wall. Rappelling: You can use a rope and climbing gear to make a rapid descent while climbing. You must have a climber’s kit, rope, and at least 1 rank in Climb. While rappelling, you can descend at your base land speed down a wall of any surface type with a DC 10 Climb check, or you can take a full-round action to move twice your speed. You can take a full-round action to descend at four times your speed by making a DC 20 Climb check. You take normal DC modifiers for a slippery wall and trying to retain your Dexterity bonus to AC, and the DC increases by 10 if you have no wall to brace against.  MOVEMENT  Example Surface or Activity DC A slope too steep to walk up, or a knotted rope with a wall to brace against 0 A rope with a wall to brace against, or a knotted rope, or a rope affected by the rope trick spell 5 A surface with ledges to hold on to and stand on, such as a very rough wall or a ship’s rigging 10 Any surface with adequate handholds and footholds (natural or artificial), such as a very rough natural rock surface or a tree, or an unknotted rope, or pulling yourself up when dangling by your hands 15 An uneven surface with some narrow handholds and footholds, such as a typical wall in a dungeon or ruin 20 A rough surface, such as a natural rock wall or a brick wall 25 An overhang or ceiling with handholds but no footholds 25 A perfectly smooth, flat, vertical surface —  If you fail, you descend at the rate you intended, but take 1d6 points of damage. If you fail by 5 or more, you descend so rapidly you’re considered to be falling. If you manage to catch yourself while falling in this way, you still take 1d6 points of damage. If you rappel off the end of a rope, you fall. Catching Yourself while Falling: Make a Climb check (DC = wall’s DC + 20) to catch yourself while falling. It’s much easier to catch yourself on a slope (DC = slope’s DC + 10) or while rappelling (DC = DC to rappel + 10). Catching a Falling Creature while Climbing: If a creature climbing above you or adjacent to you falls, you can attempt to catch that creature if it’s within your reach. Doing so requires a successful melee touch attack against the falling creature, who can voluntarily forego any Dexterity bonus to AC. If you hit, you must immediately attempt a Climb check (DC = wall’s DC + 10). Success indicates that you catch the falling creature, but its total weight, including equipment, can’t exceed your maximum load (see Encumbrance, page 47) or you automatically fall. If you fail your Climb check by 4 or less, you fail to stop the creature’s fall but don’t lose your grip on the wall. If you fail by 5 or more, you fail to stop the creature’s fall and begin falling as well. Natural Climb Speed: A creature that has a natural climb speed moves at the noted speed while climbing. It has a +8 racial bonus on all Climb checks. The creature must succeed on a Climb check to climb any wall or slope that has a DC higher than 0, but it can choose to take 10, even if distracted or threatened. If the creature chooses an accelerated climb, it moves at double the given climb speed or its base land speed, whichever is lower, and makes a single Climb check at a –5 penalty. Creatures can’t run while climbing. A creature that has a climb speed retains its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class while climbing, and opponents get no special bonus on their attacks against it.  Crawl You can crawl 5 feet as a move action. You can’t take a 5-foot step, because your speed is effectively 5 feet. Crawling provokes attacks of opportunity. If a creature, such as a snake, uses no limbs to move its land speed, that creature can crawl at its normal speed, provoking attacks of opportunity as it would for regular movement.  Fly A creature that has a natural fly speed can move through the air at the noted speed. All fly speeds include a parenthetical note indicating maneuverability (see Maneuverability). A creature can run while flying in a straight line (see Run, page 93). Most creatures can’t fly if carrying a medium or heavy load. A creature’s description takes precedence over these general rules. Maneuverability: Each flying creature has a maneuverability that defines how good it is at turning and changing direction in the air. The following table defines the capabilities a creature has at a particular maneuverability.  91  MOVEMENT  Maneuverability ———— Maneuverability ———— Perfect Good Average Poor Clumsy None None Half Half Half  Minimum forward speed Hover Move backward Reverse Turn  Yes Yes Free Any  Turn in place  Any  Maximum turn Up angle Up speed Down angle Down speed Between down and up  Any Any Full Any ×2 0  Yes Yes –5 ft. 90˚/ 5 ft. +90˚/ –5 ft. Any Any × 1/2 Any ×2 0  No No No 45˚/ 5 ft. +45˚/ –5 ft. 90˚ 60˚ × 1/2 Any ×2 5 ft.  No No No 45˚/ 5 ft. No  No No No 45˚/ 10 ft. No  45˚ 45˚ × 1/2 45˚ ×2 10 ft.  45˚ 45˚ × 1/2 45˚ ×2 20 ft.  Minimum Forward Speed: If a flying creature fails to maintain its minimum forward speed, it must land at the end of its movement. If it’s too high above the ground to land, it falls straight down, descending 150 feet in the first round of falling. If this distance brings it to the ground, it takes falling damage. If the fall doesn’t bring the creature to the ground, it must spend its next turn recovering from the stall. It must succeed on a DC 20 Reflex save to recover; otherwise, it falls an additional 300 feet. If it hits the ground, it takes falling damage. If not, it has another chance to recover on its next turn. Hover: The ability to stay in one place while airborne. Move Backward: The ability to move backward without turning around. Reverse: A creature that has good maneuverability uses up 5 feet of its speed to start flying backward. Turn: How much the creature can turn after covering the stated distance. Turn in Place: A creature that has good or average maneuverability can use some of its speed to turn in place. Maximum Turn: How much the creature can turn in any one space. Up Angle: The angle at which the creature can climb. Up Speed: How fast the creature can climb. Down Angle: The angle at which the creature can descend. Down Speed: A flying creature can fly down at twice its normal flying speed. Between Down and Up: An average, poor, or clumsy flier must fly level for a minimum distance after descending and before climbing. Any flier can begin descending after a climb without an intervening distance of level flight.  Hide (Dex; Armor Check Penalty)  92  You need cover or concealment to attempt a Hide check. Total cover or total concealment usually obviates the need for a Hide check, since nobody can see you anyway. Your Hide check is opposed by the Spot check of anyone who might see you. You can move up to half your normal speed and hide at no penalty. When moving at a speed greater than half but less than your normal speed, you take a –5 penalty. You can take  a –20 penalty on your Hide check to hide while attacking, running, or charging. If someone is observing you, even casually, you can’t hide. You can run around a corner or behind cover so that you’re out of sight and then hide, but the others then know at least where you went. If your observers are momentarily distracted, you can attempt to hide. While the others turn their attention from you, you can attempt a Hide check if you can get to a hiding place of some kind. The hiding place has to be within 1 foot per rank you have in Hide. This check, however, is made at a –10 penalty because you have to move fast. If you’re successfully hidden with respect to another creature, that creature is flat-footed with respect to you. That creature treats you as if you were invisible (see page 76). Blend into a Crowd: You can use the Hide skill to blend into a crowd, but doing so conceals you only from someone scanning the area to find you. You remain visible to everyone around you, and if they happen to be hostile, they’re likely to point you out. Move between Cover: If you’re already hiding thanks to cover or concealment, and you have at least 5 ranks in Hide, you can make a Hide check (with a penalty) to try to move across an area that doesn’t offer cover or concealment without revealing yourself. For every 5 ranks in Hide you possess, you can move up to 5 feet between one hiding place and another. For every 5 feet of open space you must cross between hiding places, you take a –5 penalty on your Hide check. Movement speed penalizes the check as normal. Sneak up from Hiding: You can sneak up on someone after emerging from a hiding place. For every 5 feet of open space between you and the target, you take a –5 penalty on your Hide check. If your Hide check succeeds, your target doesn’t notice you until you attack or perform some other attention-grabbing action. Such a target is treated as being flat-footed with respect to you. Sniping: If you’ve already successfully hidden at least 10 feet from your target, you can make one ranged attack, then take a move action to hide again. You take a –20 penalty on your Hide check to conceal yourself after the shot.  Jump (Str; Armor Check Penalty) You can jump as part of your movement. Distance moved by jumping is counted against your normal maximum movement for the turn. The DC and the distance you can cover vary according to the type of jump you’re attempting (see below). Your Jump check is modified by your speed. You take a –6 penalty for every 10 feet of speed you have less than 30 feet. You gain a +4 bonus for every 10 feet of speed you have more than 30 feet. All Jump DCs given here assume that you get a running start, which requires that you move at least 20 feet in a straight line before jumping. If you don’t get a running start, the DC for the jump is doubled. If you have ranks in Jump and you succeed on a Jump check, you land on your feet (when appropriate). If you attempt a Jump check untrained, you land prone unless you beat the DC by 5 or more.  MOVEMENT  Long Jump: A long jump is a horizontal jump, made across a gap like a chasm or stream. At the midpoint of the jump, you attain a vertical height equal to one-quarter of the horizontal distance. The DC for the jump is equal to the distance jumped (in feet). If your check succeeds, you land at the far end. If you fail the check by less than 5, you don’t clear the distance, but you grab the far edge of the gap if you succeed on a DC 15 Reflex save. You end your movement grasping the far edge if the save succeeds. If that leaves you dangling over a chasm or gap, clambering up requires a move action and a DC 15 Climb check. High Jump: A high jump is a vertical leap made to reach something overhead. The DC is equal to four times the distance to be cleared. Vertical reach (see below) can help you reach your intended height. If you jumped up to grab something, a successful check indicates that you reached the desired height. If you want to pull yourself up, you can do so with a move action and a DC 15 Climb check. If you fail the Jump check, you don’t reach the height, and you land in the space you jumped from. Hop Up: You can jump up onto an object as tall as your waist with a DC 10 Jump check. Doing so counts as 10 feet of movement. You don’t need to get a running start to hop up, so the DC isn’t doubled if you don’t get a running start. Vertical Reach: The difficulty of reaching a given height varies according to the size of a creature. The maximum vertical reach—the height a creature can reach without jumping—for an average creature of a given size is shown on the following table. Treat quadrupedal creatures as being one size category smaller. Creature Size Colossal Gargantuan Huge Large Medium Small Tiny Diminutive Fine  Vertical Reach 128 ft. 64 ft. 32 ft. 16 ft. 8 ft. 4 ft. 2 ft. 1 ft. 1/2 ft.  Move Silently (Dex; Armor Check Penalty) You can move silently at up to half your normal speed at no penalty. When moving at a speed greater than half but not greater than your full speed, you take a –5 penalty. You take a –20 penalty on checks to move silently while running or charging. Noisy surfaces, such as pools, undergrowth, and heavy debris impose a –2 penalty on Move Silently checks. Very noisy surfaces, such as dense undergrowth and heavy snow, impose a –5 penalty.  Run You can run as a full-round action. When you run, you can move up to four times your speed in a straight line. You move up to three times your speed if you’re in heavy armor. You’re denied your Dexterity bonus to AC, since you can’t avoid  attacks. You can’t run across difficult terrain or if you can’t see where you’re going. You can run for a number of rounds equal to your Constitution score, but after that you must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution check to continue running. You must check again each round in which you continue to run, and the DC of this check increases by 1 for each check you have previously made. When you fail this check, you must stop running. A creature that has run its limit must rest for 1 minute (10 rounds) before running again. During a rest period, a creature can move no faster than is allowed during a normal move action.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  Vertical Reach  Swim (Str; Armor Check Penalty ×2)  If you don’t have a natural swim speed, you can use a move action to swim at up to one-quarter your speed by making an appropriate Swim check. You can use a full-round action swim at up to half your speed by making an appropriate Swim check. By accepting a –10 penalty on your check, you can move twice as quickly using either type of action. If you fail by 4 or less, you make no progress through the water. If you fail by 5 or more, you go underwater and must hold your breath (see Suffocation, page 141).  93  When underwater, swimming creatures can move in any direction as if flying with perfect maneuverability. The DC for the Swim check depends on the water, as given on the table below.  Swim  MOVEMENT  Water Calm water Rough water Stormy water1  DC 10 15 20  1 You can’t take 10 on a Swim check in stormy water, even if you aren’t otherwise being threatened or distracted.  Natural Swim Speed: A creature that has a natural swim speed can move through water at its swim speed without making Swim checks. It has a +8 racial bonus on any Swim check to perform some special maneuver or avoid a hazard. The creature can choose to take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered. The creature can run while swimming, provided it swims in a straight line. Jumping in Water: Creatures that have natural swim speeds use that speed to determine how they jump when in water. They take a –10 penalty on high jumps from water, the final result measuring how high the jumper’s feet or tail is out of the water after the jump. Creatures that lack a natural swim speed can’t jump while in water.  Tumble (Dex; Trained Only; Armor Check Penalty) While making Tumble checks, you move at half speed, but you do so only in squares that you make Tumble checks to move through. You can move at full speed while making Tumble checks by adding 10 to each check’s DC. You can run while making Tumble checks by adding 20 to each check’s DC. If you succeed on a DC 15 Tumble check, you can move past opponents without provoking attacks of opportunity. You must make a Tumble check to avoid provoking attacks of opportunity from an opponent as you move by that foe, adding 2 to the DC for each opponent after the first. Failure means you provoke attacks of opportunity normally. If two opponents must be passed at the same time, the tumbler chooses which one to check against first. If you succeed on a DC 25 Tumble check, you can move through an opponent’s space (over, under, or around that enemy), provoking no attacks of opportunity. You must make a Tumble check against an opponent as you move through that foe’s space, adding 2 to the DC for each opponent after the first. Failure means you stop before entering the opponent’s space, and you provoke an attack of opportunity from that foe. If you succeed on a DC 35 Tumble check, you can stand up from prone as a free action. Standing in this way still provokes attacks of opportunity. Obstructed or otherwise treacherous surfaces are tough to tumble over. The DC of any Tumble check made to tumble into such a square is modified as indicated on the following table.  94  Tumble Surface Is . . . DC Modifier Lightly obstructed (light debris, shallow water, undergrowth) +2 Severely obstructed (natural cavern floor, heavy debris, dense undergrowth) +5 Lightly slippery (wet floor) +2 Severely slippery (ice sheet) +5 Sloped or angled +2 1 Tumbling is impossible in a deep bog.  Withdraw Withdrawing is a full-round action. When you withdraw, you can move up to double your speed. The square you start out in isn’t considered threatened by any opponent you can see, and therefore visible enemies don’t get attacks of opportunity against you when you move from that square. Invisible enemies still get attacks of opportunity against you, and you can’t withdraw from combat if you’re blinded. If, during the process of withdrawing, you move out of a threatened square other than the one you started in, those threatening that square can make attacks of opportunity as normal for your movement. You can’t withdraw using a mode of movement for which you don’t have a natural speed. Restricted Activity: If you’re unable to take a full round’s worth of actions on your turn, such as during a surprise round, you can withdraw as a standard action. In this case, you can move up to your speed rather than up to double your speed. All other rules for withdrawing still apply.  DIAGONAL MOVEMENT When measuring distance, the first diagonal counts as 1 square, the second counts as 2 squares, the third counts as 1, the fourth as 2, and so on. You can’t move diagonally past a corner. You can move diagonally past a creature, even an opponent. You can also move diagonally past other impassable obstacles, such as pits.  LEGAL MOVEMENT Whether you can move through a square and how much effort it takes depends on what’s in that square already. You can move through a square occupied by a friendly creature, unless you’re charging. When you move through a square occupied by a friendly creature, that creature doesn’t provide you with cover.  Opponent Generally, you can’t move through a square occupied by an opponent. This rule has the following exceptions. Extreme Size Difference: You can move through the squares in the space of an opponent three or more size categories larger than you are. You can also move through the space of an opponent three or more size categories smaller than you are. Helpless: You can move through a square occupied by a helpless opponent, but a creature, particularly a very large one, might present an obstacle even when helpless. In such cases, each square the creature occupies counts as difficult terrain (see Hampered Movement, below). Overrun: During your movement, you can attempt to move through a square occupied by an opponent by using the overrun special attack (see page 108). Special Abilities: Some special abilities allow you to move through squares in an opponent’s space or make it so an opponent can’t stop you from moving through its space, but you provoke an attack of opportunity from a creature whose space you enter unless a special ability also prevents such an attack. Tumbling: A creature trained in the Tumble skill can try to tumble through a square occupied by an opponent (see Tumble, above) without provoking attacks of opportunity. Very Small Creature: A Tiny or smaller creature can move through squares occupied by an opponent. Such a creature provokes attacks of opportunity for doing so. Other Exceptions: Some creatures break these rules. You can’t move through squares completely filled by a creature, even if you have the Tumble skill some sort of special ability, unless the ability’s description says otherwise or the DM rules otherwise.  HAMPERED MOVEMENT The rules presented so far assume that you’re moving through an area clear of obstacles or difficult terrain. They also assume you have enough space to move freely. However, these situations aren’t always true. The following table summarizes situations that hamper movement.  Hampered Movement Situation Difficult terrain Obstacle1 Poor visibility Squeezing Impassable  Movement Cost ×2 ×2 ×2 ×2 —  MOVEMENT  Friend  If you’re in a space with a helpless Small or larger creature that ceases being helpless, and for whatever reason that creature can’t share spaces with you, it must remain prone, attempt to grapple you, or leave your space at its first opportunity. It provokes attacks of opportunity as normal for what it does.  1 Might require a skill check.  Difficult Terrain Difficult terrain includes heavy debris, shallow water, slopes that can be walked up, undergrowth, and similar environmental factors that slow and hamper movement. Each square of difficult terrain counts as 2 squares of movement. Each diagonal square counts as 3 squares. You can’t run or charge across difficult terrain. If you occupy a space that includes different kinds of terrain, you can move only as fast as the most difficult terrain in your space allows. Flying and incorporeal creatures aren’t hampered by difficult terrain.  Obstacles Like difficult terrain, obstacles can hamper movement. If an obstacle hampers movement but doesn’t completely block it, each obstructed square costs double the normal movement cost. It costs 2 squares of movement to cross an obstacle that separates two squares. You must pay this cost to cross the barrier, in addition to the cost to move into the square on the other side. If you don’t have sufficient movement to cross the barrier and move into the square on the other side, you can’t cross the barrier. Some obstacles might also require a skill check to cross. Other obstacles block movement entirely. A creature can’t move through a blocking obstacle. Flying and incorporeal creatures can easily avoid many obstacles.  Squeezing Sharing Spaces If you’re Small or larger, you usually can’t end your movement in a square occupied by another Small or larger creature, effectively sharing a space with that creature. You can share space with a creature that is helpless or one that has a special ability that allows it to share spaces. You can also share spaces with a creature you’re riding or carrying, or a creature you’re grappling. If you have a special ability that allows you to do so, you can share a space with another creature. Regardless, you still provoke an attack of opportunity from a creature whose space you enter. Tiny and smaller creatures can freely share space with other creatures (see Size, page 116).  In some cases, you might have to squeeze into or through an area that isn’t as wide as the space you take up, hampering your movement. You can squeeze through or into a space that is at least half as wide as your normal space. Each move into or through a narrow space costs double. While squeezed in a narrow space, you take a –4 penalty on attack rolls and a –4 penalty to AC. Space Occupied by Big Creatures: When a Large creature squeezes into a space that’s 1 square wide, the creature’s miniature figure occupies 2 squares, centered on the line between those squares. For a bigger creature, center the creature likewise in the area it squeezes into.  95  MOVEMENT  Squeezing Past an Opponent: A creature can squeeze past an opponent while moving, provoking attacks of opportunity as normal for its movement. A creature still can’t end its movement in an occupied square. Squeezing into Very Tight Spaces: To squeeze through or into a space less than half your space’s width, you must succeed on a DC 30 Escape Artist check. You can’t attack while using Escape Artist to squeeze through or into a narrow space, you take a –4 penalty to AC, and you’re denied your Dexterity bonus to AC.  SPECIAL MOVEMENT RULES The following rules cover special movement situations.  Ending Movement in an Illegal Space Sometimes a creature ends its movement while moving through a space it isn’t allowed to stop in. When that happens, put the creature in the last legal position it occupied or the closest legal position, whichever is closer.  diagonally. Doing this doesn’t allow you to move through impassable terrain or to move when movement is prohibited, such as when you’re paralyzed. Such movement provokes attacks of opportunity as normal—despite the distance covered, this move isn’t a 5-foot step.  Chases In round-by-round movement, simply counting off squares, it’s impossible for a slow creature without favorable circumstances to get away from a determined fast creature. It’s no problem for a fast creature to get away from a slower one. When the speeds of two creatures are equal, and one creature is pursuing another, both are moving at the same speed, and the chase continues for at least a few rounds, have them make opposed Dexterity checks to see who is the faster over those rounds. If the creature being chased wins, it escapes. If the pursuer wins, it catches the fleeing creature.  Freeform Movement Movement Cost When your movement is hampered in some way, your movement usually costs double. As with all real-world values, movement costs are multiplied by normal math rules. If movement cost is doubled twice, then each square counts as 4 squares, and each diagonal square counts as 6 squares. If movement cost is doubled three times, then each square counts as 8 squares (12 if diagonal) and so on.  Minimum Movement  96  Despite penalties to movement, you can take a full-round action to move 5 feet (1 square) into a legal space, even  When the characters aren’t engaged in round-by-round combat, they should be able to move anywhere and in any manner that you can imagine real people could. A 5-foot square can hold several Medium creatures. Those creatures just can’t all fight effectively in that small space. The rules for movement are important for combat, but outside combat they can impose unnecessary hindrances on character activities. During casual (noncombat) scenes, you usually won’t have to worry about movement rates. When how far a creature can move in a nontactical situation is important, local and overland movement come into play.  LOCAL MOVEMENT  MOVEMENT  Creatures exploring an area use local movement, measured in feet per minute. While moving on a local scale, you walk, hustle, or run. The Local Movement and Distance table gives actual distances. Walk: A walk represents unhurried movement. Hustle: A hustle is a jog. Run: Running is speedy and purposeful movement—about 12 miles per hour for an unencumbered human, or 8 miles per hour for a human in medium or heavy armor. You can run for a number of rounds equal to your Constitution score, but after that you must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution check to continue running. You must check again in each round in which you continue to run, and the DC of this check increases by 1 for each check you have previously made. When you fail this check, you must stop running. A creature that has run its limit must rest for 1 minute (10 rounds) before running again. During a rest period, a creature can move no faster than a hustle on the local scale.  Local Movement and Distance 1 Minute Walk Hustle Run (× 3) Run (× 4)  ————— Speed ——–—— 15 feet 20 feet 30 feet 40 feet 150 ft. 200 ft. 300 ft. 400 ft. 300 ft. 400 ft. 600 ft. 800 ft. 450 ft. 600 ft. 900 ft. 1,200 ft. 600 ft. 800 ft. 1,200 ft. 1,600 ft.  TAILING Illus. by W. O’Connor  While moving on the local scale, you can use Hide to follow someone while remaining unseen. If you stay at least 60 feet away from your quarry, you must succeed on a Hide check opposed by your quarry’s Spot check once every 10 minutes. At a distance of less than 60 feet, you must make a Hide check each round and begin operating on the combat scale. Extraordinary activities on your part (such as spellcasting or attacking) can disrupt this attempt even if you succeed on the check. Tailing someone still requires cover or concealment, as normal for attempting a Hide check. A moderately crowded street provides sufficient cover and concealment to accomplish this goal. Alternatively, you can duck between areas of cover or concealment, as described in Move between Cover for the Hide skill (see page 92). Even if you fail a Hide check while tailing someone or you’re spotted while moving too great a distance between hiding places, you can attempt a Bluff check opposed by your quarry’s Sense Motive check to look innocuous. Success means your quarry sees you but doesn’t realize you’re tailing him; failure alerts him that you’re actually following. A modifier might apply to the Sense Motive check, depending on how suspicious your quarry is. The following table provides Sense Motive modifiers for particular situations.  Tailing Your Quarry . . . Sense Motive Modifier Is sure nobody is following –5 Has no reason to suspect anybody is following +0 Is worried about being followed +10 Is worried about being followed and knows you’re an enemy +20  97  MOVEMENT  OVERLAND MOVEMENT Creatures covering long distances cross-country use overland movement. Overland movement is measured in miles per hour or miles per day. You can walk or hustle on an overland scale, but you can’t run for an extended period. Attempts to run and rest in cycles effectively work out to a hustle. A day represents 8 hours of actual travel time. The table below gives the distances covered by creatures that move for a certain length of time at a particular speed. Walk: A walk represents about 3 miles per hour for an unencumbered human. You can walk 8 hours in a day of travel without a problem. The rest of the daylight time is spent making and breaking camp, resting, and eating. Walking for longer than that can wear you out. See Forced March. Hustle: A hustle represents about 6 miles per hour for an unencumbered human. You can hustle for 1 hour without a problem. Hustling for a second hour in between periods of sleep or rest deals 1 point of nonlethal damage, and each additional hour deals twice the damage taken during the previous hour of hustling. A creature that takes any nonlethal damage from hustling becomes fatigued.  Overland Movement and Distance 1 Hour Walk Hustle  ————— Speed ——–—— 15 feet 20 feet 30 feet 40 feet 1-1/2 miles 2 miles 3 miles 4 miles 3 miles 4 miles 6 miles 8 miles  1 Day Walk  15 feet 12 miles  20 feet 30 feet 16 miles 24 miles  40 feet 32 miles  TERRAIN The terrain through which you travel affects how much distance you can cover in an hour or a day. See the Terrain and Overland Movement table. Highway: A highway is a straight, major, paved road. Road: A road is typically a dirt track. Trail: A trail is like a road, except that it allows only single-fi le travel and doesn’t benefit a party traveling with vehicles. Trackless: Trackless terrain is a wild area with no paths.  Terrain and Overland Movement Terrain Desert, sandy Forest Hills Jungle Moor Mountains Plains Swamp Tundra  Highway ×1 ×1 ×1 ×1 ×1 × 3/4 ×1 ×1 ×1  Road or Trail × 1/2 ×1 × 3/4 × 3/4 ×1 × 3/4 ×1 × 3/4 × 3/4  Trackless × 1/2 × 1/2 × 1/2 × 1/4 × 3/4 × 1/2 × 3/4 × 1/2 × 3/4  Trailblazing  98  A successful DC 15 Survival check improves the factor by which movement is modified by terrain by × 1/4 up to a maximum of × 1. A successful DC 25 Survival check improves the factor by × 1/2, also up to a maximum of × 1. A trailblazer can guide four others without penalty, but takes a –2 penalty on this check for every three additional  creatures beyond the original four. Trailblazing improves only overland movement, and only one check can be made per day.  FORCED MARCH You can walk for more than 8 hours in a day by making a forced march. For each hour of marching beyond 8 hours, a Constitution check (DC 10, +2 per extra hour) is required. If the check fails, you take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. A creature that takes any nonlethal damage from a forced march becomes fatigued. Eliminating the nonlethal damage also eliminates the fatigue. It’s possible to march until you become unconscious.  Pushing a Mount A mount bearing a rider can be ordered to move at a hustle. The damage it takes when doing so, however, is lethal damage, not nonlethal damage. The creature can also be ridden in a forced march, but its Constitution checks automatically fail, and, again, the damage it takes is lethal damage. Mounts become fatigued when they take any damage from hustling or forced marches. See the table below for mounted speeds and speeds for vehicles pulled by draft animals.  Movement for Mounts and Vehicles Land Transport Per Hour Cart or wagon 2 miles Mount (load carried, if any) Light horse or light warhorse 6 miles Light horse (151–450 lb.) 4 miles Light warhorse (231–690 lb.) 4 miles Heavy horse or heavy warhorse 5 miles Heavy horse (201–600 lb.) 3-1/2 miles Heavy warhorse (301–900 lb.) 3-1/2 miles Pony or warpony 4 miles Pony (76–225 lb.) 3 miles Warpony (101–300 lb.) 3 miles Donkey or mule 3 miles Donkey (51–150 lb.) 2 miles Mule (231–690 lb.) 2 miles Dog, riding 4 miles Dog, riding (101–300 lb.) 3 miles  48 miles 32 miles 32 miles 40 miles 28 miles 28 miles 32 miles 24 miles 24 miles 24 miles 16 miles 16 miles 32 miles 24 miles  Watercraft Raft or barge (poled or towed) Keelboat (rowed) Rowboat (rowed) Sailing ship (sailed) Warship (sailed and rowed) Longship (sailed and rowed) Galley (rowed and sailed)  5 miles 10 miles 15 miles 48 miles 60 miles 72 miles 96 miles  1/2 mile 1 mile 1-1/2 miles 2 miles 2-1/2 miles 3 miles 4 miles  Per Day 16 miles  WATERBORNE MOVEMENT See the Movement for Mounts and Vehicles table for speeds for water vehicles. For rowed watercraft, a day represents 10 hours of rowing. For a sailing ship, it represents 24 hours of sailing. Rafts, barges, keelboats, and rowboats are used on lakes and rivers. If going downstream, add the speed of the current (typically 3 miles per hour) to the speed of the vehicle. In addition to 10 hours of being rowed, the vehicle can also float for an additional 14 hours, if someone can guide  it, so add an additional 42 miles to the daily distance traveled. These vehicles can’t be rowed against a significant current, but they can be pulled upstream by animals on the shore.  CHASES  MARCHING ORDER The characters in a party need to decide what their marching order is. Marching order is the relative position of the characters to each other while they’re moving (who is in front of or next to whom). Arrange miniatures on the battle grid to represent the PCs’ relative locations. You can change the marching order as the party enters different areas, as characters are wounded, or at other times for any reason.  LIVING OFF THE LAND A creature can move at half speed during overland travel, hunting and foraging, providing food and water for itself by succeeding on a DC 10 Survival check. This DC increases by 5 for inhospitable lands, such as a desert, and by 10 for barren lands, including the open ocean for nonaquatic creatures. Survival can even be used in this way in an urban environment. A survivalist can provide food for one other creature for every 2 points by which the Survival check result exceeds the DC.  GETTING LOST Following an obvious road, trail, or feature, such as a stream or shoreline, prevents any possibility of becoming lost, but travelers striking off cross-country might become disoriented—especially in conditions of poor visibility or in rough terrain.  Visibility Any time you can’t see at least 60 feet in the prevailing conditions of visibility, you might become lost. Those traveling in poor visibility easily lose the ability to see any landmarks not in their immediate vicinity.  Terrain Those in forest, moor, hill, or mountain terrain might become lost if they move away from an obvious path or track. Forests are especially bad because they obscure other landmarks and make it hard to see the sun or stars.  If conditions exist that make getting lost a possibility, the creature leading the way must succeed on a Survival check once per hour (or portion of an hour) spent in local or overland movement or become lost. The DM makes the check, since the party might not realize it’s lost. A creature that has at least 5 ranks in Knowledge (geography) or Knowledge (local) pertaining to the area being traveled through receives a +2 bonus on this check. A creature that has 5 or more ranks in Survival can determine which direction is north by succeeding on a DC 15 Survival check, and such a creature can use that information to avoid getting lost. The difficulty of the Survival check to avoid getting lost varies based on the terrain, the visibility conditions, and whether the party has a map of the area. Refer to the following table, and use the highest DC that applies.  MOVEMENT  Sometimes a chase occurs overland and could last all day, with the two sides only occasionally getting glimpses of each other at a distance. In the case of a long chase, an opposed Constitution check made by all parties determines which can keep pace the longest. If the creature being chased rolls the highest, it gets away. If not, the chaser runs down its prey, outlasting it with stamina.  Chance to Get Lost  Avoiding Getting Lost Terrain Forest Moor or hill, map Moor or hill, no map Mountain, map Mountain, no map Poor visibility  Survival DC 15 6 10 8 12 12  Effects of Being Lost If a party becomes lost, it’s no longer certain of moving in the direction it intended to travel. The DM randomly determines the actual direction of travel during each hour of local or overland movement. The characters’ movement continues to be random until they blunder into a landmark, or until they recognize that they’re lost and make an effort to regain their bearings. Recognizing that You’re Lost: Once per hour of random travel, each character in the party can attempt a Survival check (DC 20, –1 per hour of random travel) to recognize that they’re no longer certain of their direction of travel. Circumstances, such as an established and known time of travel between two locations, might make it obvious that the characters are lost. Setting a New Course: A lost party is also uncertain of determining the direction it should travel to reach a desired objective. Determining the correct direction of travel once a party has become lost requires a member to make a Survival check (DC 15, +2 per hour of random travel). The DM makes the check. If the check fails, the character chooses a random direction as the correct direction for resuming travel. Once the characters are traveling along their new course, correct or incorrect, they might get lost again. If the conditions still make it possible for travelers to become lost, check once per hour.  99  Natural Attacks Natural attacks come in two forms—natural weapons and special attacks. Natural weapons, such as fangs or claws, are physically a part of a creature. Special attacks are special ways a creature can use its inborn attributes to harm other creatures.  Illus. by E. Deschamps  NATURAL ATTACKS  ATTACKS A creature making a melee attack with a natural weapon is considered armed and doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Likewise, it threatens any space it can reach. Unless otherwise noted, a natural weapon threatens a critical hit on a natural attack roll of 20. Creatures don’t receive additional attacks from a high base attack bonus when using natural weapons. The number of attacks a creature can make with its natural weapons depends on the type of the attack—a creature can make one bite attack, one attack per claw or tentacle, one gore attack, one sting attack, or one slam attack. Large or larger creatures that have arms or armlike limbs can make a slam attack with each arm. Refer to the individual monster descriptions, which take precedence over these general rules.  PRIMARY AND SECONDARY When a creature has more than one natural weapon, one of them, or sometimes a pair or set of them, is the primary weapon. All the creature’s remaining natural weapons are secondary. A creature’s primary natural weapon is its most effective natural weapon, and the creature uses its full attack bonus with that weapon. It applies its full Strength modifier on damage with its primary weapon—or 1-1/2 × its Strength bonus if it has only one natural weapon. A Strength penalty on damage rolls applies whenever a creature uses a natural weapon, but it isn’t multiplied. Attacks with secondary natural weapons are made with a –5 penalty on the attack roll, no matter how many the creature has. This penalty applies even when the creature makes a single attack with a secondary natural weapon, even as an attack of opportunity. A creature applies 1/2 its Strength bonus to damage dealt by a secondary natural weapon (but its full Strength penalty), even when the secondary natural weapon is used alone as a single attack.  WEAPON TYPES  100  Natural weapons have types just as other weapons do. The most common are summarized here. Bite: The creature attacks with its mouth, dealing piercing, slashing, and bludgeoning damage. Claw or Talon: The creature rips with a sharp appendage, dealing piercing and slashing damage.  Gore: The creature spears the opponent with an antler, horn, or similar appendage, dealing piercing damage. Slap or Slam: The creature batters opponents with an appendage, dealing bludgeoning damage. Sting: The creature stabs with a stinger, dealing piercing damage. Sting attacks usually deal damage from poison in addition to hit point damage. Tentacle: The creature flails at opponents with a powerful tentacle, dealing bludgeoning damage. Tentacles sometimes deal slashing damage in addition to bludgeoning damage.  COMBINING WEAPONS Some creatures combine attacks with natural and manufactured weapons when they make a full attack. When they do so, the manufactured weapon attack is considered the primary attack unless the creature’s description indicates otherwise, and any natural weapons the creature also uses are considered secondary. These secondary attacks don’t interfere with the primary attack, but they take the usual penalty for being secondary attacks, even if the natural weapon used is normally the creature’s primary natural weapon.  SPECIAL ATTACKS Many special attacks affect the way a creature uses its natural weapons or provide a creature with another natural form of attack.  Aligned Strike Attacks made by a creature that has this supernatural special attack are treated as aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. The specific alignment or alignments are noted in parentheses (chaotic, evil, good, or lawful).  Constrict A creature that has this extraordinary special attack can crush an opponent, dealing bludgeoning damage, after making a successful grapple check to deal damage. The amount of damage is given in the creature’s entry. If the creature also has the improved grab ability, it deals damage from the constrict attack in addition to damage dealt by the weapon used to grab.  Disease A creature that has this extraordinary special attack can infect another creature with disease. Diseases can be extraordinary or supernatural, even if the special attack that infl icts the disease is extraordinary.  Epic Strike Natural weapon attacks made by a creature that has this supernatural special attack are treated as having a +6 magical enhancement bonus for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  Improved Grab  Magic Strike Natural weapon attacks made by a creature that has this supernatural special attack are treated as magic for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  Paralysis A creature that has this special attack can render another creature paralyzed. This special attack can be extraordinary or supernatural.  grapple, and they use the creature’s normal attack bonus. The extra rake attacks deal normal damage for the natural weapon used + 1/2 the creature’s Strength bonus or its full Strength penalty. A monster that has the rake ability must begin its turn grappling to use its rake. It can’t begin a grapple and rake during the same turn unless it has the pounce ability or some other ability that allows it to start a grapple and rake during the same turn.  Rend If a creature that has this extraordinary special attack hits with the specified natural attack, it latches onto the opponent’s body and tears the flesh. The rend attack deals damage equal to that dealt by the creature’s natural weapon + 1-1/2 times its Strength bonus or its full Strength penalty.  Swallow Whole  NATURAL ATTACKS  If a creature that has this extraordinary special attack hits with a natural melee weapon (usually a claw or bite attack), it deals normal damage and attempts to start a grapple as a free action without provoking attacks of opportunity. No initial melee touch attack is required. Unless otherwise noted, improved grab works only against opponents at least one size category smaller than the creature. When a creature gets a hold after an improved grab attack, it pulls the opponent into its space. This act doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. The creature has the option to conduct the grapple normally or simply use the part of its body it used in the improved grab to hold the opponent. If it chooses to do the latter, it takes a –20 penalty on grapple checks, but it isn’t considered grappled itself. Thus, the creature isn’t denied its Dexterity bonus to AC, still threatens an area, and can use its remaining attacks against other opponents. Whenever the creature makes a successful grapple check to deal damage, it deals the damage indicated for the natural weapon that it used to make the improved grab. If the creature also has the constrict ability, it deals damage from the constrict attack in addition to damage dealt by the natural weapon used to grab.  If a creature that has this extraordinary special attack begins its turn with an opponent held in its mouth, it can attempt a new grapple check. If it succeeds, it swallows that foe, dealing normal damage for a bite. The opponent must usually be smaller than the swallowing creature. Being swallowed has various consequences, depending on the creature doing the swallowing. A swallowed opponent is considered to be grappled, but the creature that did the swallowing isn’t. A swallowed opponent can try to cut its way free with any light slashing or piercing weapon, or it can try to escape the grapple. The inside of a creature normally has an Armor Class of 5 + 1/2 its natural armor bonus, with no modifiers for size or Dexterity. If the swallowed opponent escapes the grapple, it ends up back in the attacker’s mouth, where it can be bitten or swallowed again.  Trample Poison A creature that has this extraordinary special attack can poison another creature.  Pounce When a creature that has this extraordinary special attack charges, it can still make a full attack even if it charged while restricted to a single action. All its attacks receive the +2 bonus on attack rolls gained from charging. If it uses its attacks to successfully start a grapple, and it has the rake ability, it can also make rake attacks.  Powerful Charge When a creature that has this extraordinary special attack makes a charge, its attack deals extra damage in addition to the normal benefits and hazards of a charge. (This ability is similar to but not the same as the feat of the same name.)  Rake A creature that has this extraordinary special attack gains extra natural attacks when it grapples. Normally, a monster can attack with only one of its natural weapons when grappling, but a creature that has the rake ability usually gains two additional claw attacks that it can use only against a grappled foe. Rake attacks aren’t subject to the usual –4 penalty for attacking with a natural weapon in a  As a full-round action, a creature that has this extraordinary special attack can move up to twice its speed and run over any opponents at least one size category smaller than it. The creature merely has to move over the opponents in its path; any creature whose space is completely covered by the trampling creature’s space is subject to the trample attack. If a target’s space is larger than 5 feet, it is considered trampled only if the trampling creature moves over all the squares it occupies. If the trampling creature moves over only some of a target’s space, the target can make an attack of opportunity against the trampling creature at a –4 penalty. The creature’s description indicates the amount of bludgeoning damage the trample deals (usually the creature’s slam damage + 1-1/2 × its Strength bonus or its full Strength penalty). Trampled opponents can attempt attacks of opportunity, taking a –4 penalty on the attack roll. If they don’t make attacks of opportunity, trampled opponents can attempt Reflex saves to take half damage. The save DC against a creature’s trample attack is 10 + 1/2 creature’s HD + its Str modifier (the exact DC is given in the creature’s descriptive text). A creature can deal damage from trampling to each target only once per round, no matter how many times its movement takes it over that target.  101  Natural Hazards Nature itself is sometimes a formidable obstacle, or even a serious threat to life and limb.  NATURAL HAZARDS  ALTITUDE High altitude can be extremely fatiguing—and sometimes deadly—to creatures that aren’t used to it. Cold becomes extreme, and the lack of oxygen in the air can wear down even the hardiest warriors.  ACCLIMATED CREATURES Creatures that are accustomed to high altitude fare better than those that aren’t. Any creature whose Environment entry mentions or includes mountains is considered native to the area, and thus acclimated to the high altitude. Creatures can also acclimate themselves by living at high altitude for a month or by acquiring a related feat or ability. Those who spend more than two months away from the mountains must reacclimate themselves when they return. Undead, constructs, and other creatures that don’t breathe are immune to altitude effects.  ALTITUDE ZONES Mountains present three possible altitude bands—low pass, low peak/high pass, and high peak.  Low Pass (lower than 5,000 feet) Most travel in low mountains takes place in low passes, a zone consisting largely of alpine meadows and forests. Travelers might find the going difficult, but the altitude has no game effect.  Low Peak or High Pass (to 15,000 feet) Ascending to the highest slopes of low mountains, or most normal travel through high mountains, falls into this category. All nonacclimated creatures labor to breathe in the thin air at this altitude. Such creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save each hour (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or become fatigued. The fatigue ends when the creature descends to an altitude where more air is present.  High Peak (more than 15,000 feet) At these elevations, creatures are subject to both high altitude fatigue and altitude sickness, whether or not they’re acclimated to high altitude. Altitude sickness represents longterm oxygen deprivation, and it affects mental and physical ability scores. After each 6-hour period a creature spends at an altitude of over 15,000 feet, that creature must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or take 1 point of damage to all ability scores. Creatures acclimated to high altitude receive a +4 competence bonus on their saving throws to resist high altitude effects and altitude sickness, but eventually even seasoned mountaineers must abandon these dangerous elevations.  AVALANCHES  102  The combination of high peaks and heavy snowfalls means that avalanches are a deadly peril in many mountainous areas. Although avalanches of snow and ice are  common, it’s also possible to have an avalanche of rock and soil. Avalanches of snow and ice advance at a speed of 500 feet per round. Earth and rock avalanches travel at a speed of 250 feet per round. An avalanche consists of two distinct areas: the bury zone in the direct path of the falling debris and the slide zone, which is the area the debris spreads out to encompass. The typical avalanche has a width of 1d6×100 feet, from one edge of the slide zone to the opposite edge. The bury zone in the center of an avalanche is half as wide as the avalanche’s full width. To determine the precise location of creatures in the path of an avalanche, roll 1d6×20—the result is the number of feet from the center of the path taken by the bury zone to the center of a group’s location.  SENSING AN AVALANCHE An avalanche can be spotted from as far away as 1d10×500 feet downslope by a creature that makes a Spot check with a +16 bonus due to the avalanche’s size. With no other loud noises occurring, creatures that succeed on a DC 15 Listen check can hear an avalanche when it’s 1d6×500 feet away. If all creatures fail their checks, the avalanche moves closer to them, and they automatically become aware of it when it closes to half the original distance at which it could have been spotted.  AVALANCHE EFFECTS Creatures in the bury zone take 8d6 points of damage (Reflex DC 15 half). They’re subsequently buried. Creatures in the slide zone take 3d6 points of damage (Reflex DC 15 negates). Those that fail their saves are buried. Both zones are filled with heavy debris (difficult terrain that affects some skill checks as detailed in the Movement entry, pages 90–95).  Buried Buried creatures take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per minute. If a buried creature falls unconscious, it must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution check or take 1d6 points of lethal damage each minute thereafter until freed or killed.  Digging Out Creatures that aren’t buried can dig out others. In 1 minute, using only its hands, a digger can clear debris equal to five times its maximum load (see page 47). Loose stone that fills a 5-foot-by-5-foot area weighs 2,000 pounds. Snow and ice weighs one-fi fth that much. Equipped with an appropriate tool, a digger can clear material twice as quickly. A buried creature can free itself with a DC 25 Strength check, at the DM’s option.  CAVE-INS Cave-ins and collapsing tunnels are extremely dangerous. A weakened ceiling might collapse when subjected to a major impact or concussion. By destroying half the pillars holding up a weakened ceiling, a creature can cause a cave-in. A weakened ceiling can be spotted with a DC 20 Knowledge (architecture and engineering) check or a DC 20 Craft (stonemasonry) check.  CAVE-IN EFFECTS Like avalanches, cave-ins have bury zones and slide zones. A typical corridor subject to a cave-in has a bury zone with a 15-foot radius and a 10-foot-radius slide zone.  page 141). Creatures below the surface can swim to the surface by succeeding on a Swim check (DC 15, +1 per consecutive round of being under the surface).  Rescuing Quicksand Victims  LAVA  QUICKSAND Patches of quicksand present a deceptively solid appearance. A typical patch of quicksand is 20 feet in diameter. A creature approaching a patch of quicksand at normal speed is entitled to a DC 15 Survival check to spot the danger before stepping in, but charging or running creatures don’t have a chance to detect quicksand. The momentum of a charging or running creature carries it 1d2×5 feet into the quicksand.  QUICKSAND EFFECTS Creatures in quicksand must succeed on a DC 10 Swim check every round to simply stay in place, or a DC 15 Swim check to move 5 feet. If a trapped creature fails this check by 5 or more, it sinks below the surface and must hold its breath (see  NATURAL HAZARDS  Lava deals 2d6 points of fire damage per round of exposure, except in the case of total immersion, which deals 20d6 points of fire damage per round. Damage from lava continues for 1d3 rounds after exposure ceases, but this additional damage is only half of that dealt during actual contact. A creature immune to fire might still suffocate (see page 141) if completely immersed in lava.  Rescuing a creature in quicksand requires the rescuer to have a tool that enables reaching the victim with one end of it. Then the rescuer must succeed on a DC 15 Strength check to pull the victim, and the victim must succeed on a DC 10 Strength check to hold onto the tool. If the victim fails to hold on, that creature must succeed on a DC 15 Swim check immediately to stay above the surface. If both checks succeed, the victim is pulled 5 feet closer to safety.  SMOKE Smoke obscures vision and can hamper breathing. Thin smoke obscures all sight beyond 60 feet, including darkvision. Creatures separated by more than 30 feet of thin smoke have concealment with respect to one another. Creatures separated by 60 feet of thin smoke have total concealment with respect to one another. Breathing thin smoke isn’t dangerous.  Thick Smoke Thick smoke grants creatures 5 feet away concealment. Creatures more than 5 feet away have total concealment. A creature that breathes thick smoke must succeed on a Fortitude save each round (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or spend that round doing nothing but choking and coughing. Choking in this way for 2 consecutive rounds deals 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. Illus. by R. Horsley  103  NATURAL HAZARDS  WATER Water is most dangerous to those who can’t breathe in it, as well as those who lack a natural swim speed. Any creature can wade in relatively calm water that isn’t over its head, with no check required. Moving through deep, nonflowing water requires a natural swim speed or successful Swim checks (see page 94). Air-breathing creatures need a way to breathe if they’re underwater, or else they risk drowning (see Suffocation, page 141).  COLD WATER If water is freezing cold, it deals 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per round. This counts as cold damage for the purpose of immunity or resistance. A creature that takes nonlethal damage from cold water is fatigued.  DEEP WATER Deep water deals 1d6 points of damage per minute for every 100 feet a creature is below the surface due to water pressure. A successful Fortitude save (DC 15, +1 for each previous check) means the diver takes no damage in that minute. Aquatic creatures don’t take damage until they’re below 500 feet, and they take only 1d6 points of damage per 200 feet below that depth. Deep water is usually cold.  FLOWING WATER Some bodies of water flow swiftly, and anything floating in them moves downstream at a speed of 10 to 40 feet per round. Rapids send swimmers downstream at 60 to 90 feet per round. Fast streams are always at least rough water, and rapids are considered stormy water. If a creature is in moving water, move that creature downstream the indicated distance at the end of its turn. A creature trying to maintain its position must swim upstream. Creatures swept away by a stream moving 60 feet per round or faster must make DC 20 Swim checks every round to avoid going under. If a creature makes the check by 5 or more, it might be able to arrest its motion by catching a stationary object in the water. Swimming to the bank requires as many DC 20 Swim checks as are needed for the creature to cover the distance to the shore. Even if its Swim check succeeds, a creature swept away by rapids takes 1d3 points of nonlethal damage per round. It takes 1d6 points of lethal damage if the water is flowing over rocks and cascades.  Floods Natural and catastrophic events can create floods. During a typical flood, rivers become wider, deeper, and swifter. Assume that a river rises by 1d10+10 feet during the spring flood, and its width increases by 1d4×50%. A river in flood stage has water one step rougher for Swim checks (see page 94). Flooding rivers also become 50% swifter.  Flash Floods Storms or spring runoff from nearby mountains can send deadly walls of water through ravines or along low desert gullies. The rocky ground sheds water instead of absorbing it, sending a torrent into lower elevations. A  104  flash flood raises the water level by 1d10+10 feet within a matter of minutes. Water washes through affected squares like rapids. A flash flood passes through an area in 3d4 hours. Along with the hazards of flowing water, the flow uproots trees and rolls enormous boulders with deadly force. Creatures struck by the initial wall of water during a flash flood must succeed on a DC 15 Reflex save or take 3d6 points of bludgeoning damage.  WILDFIRES In areas of dry vegetation, wildfires can result from careless use of flame or lightning strikes. The leading edge of a fire (the downwind side) advances 120 feet per round in moderate winds. Once a particular area is ablaze, it remains so for 2d4×10 minutes before dying to a smoking smolder. A fire can be spotted from as far away as 2d6×100 feet by a creature that makes a Spot check with a +16 bonus due to the fire’s size and light. The fire moves closer each round, and creatures readily see it when it closes to half the original distance. Creatures that are blinded or otherwise unable to make Spot checks can feel the fire when it’s 100 feet away.  WILDFIRE EFFECTS Unearthly heat pervades the area of a wildfire, and the threat of catching on fire is present. Wildfires produce thick smoke (see page 103), subjecting creatures to visibility impairment and smoke inhalation.  Ambient Heat When they are exposed to the ambient heat from a wildfire, unprotected creatures (protection level 1 or lower; see page 156 for details on levels of protection) take 1d6 points of fire damage and 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per round (no save). A creature wearing metal armor or coming into contact with very hot metal is affected as if by a heat metal spell, which lasts as long as the creature remains in the area of the fire’s ambient heat. A partially protected creature (protection level 2 or 3) takes damage once every 10 minutes. Protection level 4 or higher offers complete defense against a fire’s ambient heat.  Catching on Fire Those at risk of catching on fire are allowed a DC 15 Reflex save to avoid this fate. If a creature fails this save, it takes 1d6 points of fire damage. In each later round, the burning creature must make another Reflex save. Failure means it takes another 1d6 points of fire damage in that round. Success means the fire has gone out and deals no more damage. A creature that is on fire can extinguish the flames by jumping into enough water to soak itself. If no body of water is at hand, rolling on the ground or smothering the fire grants another save with a +4 bonus. Those unlucky enough to have their clothes or equipment catch fire must make a DC 15 Reflex save for each item. On a failed save, the item takes the same amount of damage as a burning creature does.  Nonabilities Some creatures don’t have certain ability scores. These creatures don’t have an ability score of 0—they lack the ability score altogether. The modifier for a nonability is +0. Other effects of nonabilities are detailed below.  STRENGTH  Any creature that can perceive its environment in any fashion has at least 1 point of Wisdom. Anything with no Wisdom score is an object, not a creature. Only objects have no Wisdom score, and an object that has no Wisdom score also has no Charisma score.  CHARISMA Any creature capable of telling the difference between itself and other creatures and objects has at least 1 point of Charisma. Only objects have no Charisma score, and an object that has no Charisma score also has no Wisdom score.  NONABILITIES  Any creature that can physically manipulate other objects has at least 1 point of Strength. A creature that has no Strength score can’t exert force, usually because it has no physical body or because it doesn’t move. The creature automatically fails Strength checks. If the creature can attack, it applies its Dexterity modifier to its base attack bonus instead of a Strength modifier.  WISDOM  DEXTERITY Any creature that can move has at least 1 point of Dexterity. A creature that has no Dexterity score can’t move. If it can perform actions (such as casting spells), it applies its Intelligence modifier to initiative checks instead of its Dexterity modifier. The creature automatically fails Reflex saves and Dexterity checks.  CONSTITUTION Illus. by W. Reynolds  Any living creature (any creature not of the construct, deathless, or undead type) has at least 1 point of Constitution. A creature that has no Constitution has no body or no metabolism. It’s immune to any effect that requires a Fortitude save unless the effect works on objects or is harmless. The creature is also immune to ability damage, ability drain, and energy drain, and automatically fails Constitution checks. A creature that has no Constitution can’t tire and is thusly immune to fatigue and exhaustion. It uses its Charisma score as the basis for Concentration checks.  INTELLIGENCE Any creature that can think, learn, or remember has at least 1 point of Intelligence. A creature that has no Intelligence score is mindless, an automaton operating on simple instincts or programmed instructions. Such a creature is immune to mind-affecting spells and abilities, and it automatically fails Intelligence checks. Mindless creatures don’t gain feats and skills, although they can have bonus feats or racial skill modifiers.  105  Objects  Energy  When attempting to break an object, you can attack it with a weapon or break it with sheer strength.  ATTACKING OBJECTS  OBJECTS  The sunder attack (see page 142) allows you to smash a weapon or shield using a slashing or bludgeoning weapon. Smashing another carried, worn, or unattended object is like sundering, except that your attack roll is opposed by the object’s AC instead of another attack roll.  ARMOR CLASS A carried or worn object’s AC is equal to 10 + its size modifier + the Dex modifier of the carrying or wearing creature. Attacking a carried or worn object provokes an attack of opportunity from the wearer. An unattended object’s Armor Class is equal to 10 + its size modifier + its Dex modifier. An unattended object not only has a Dexterity of 0 (–5 penalty to AC), but also an additional –2 penalty to its AC. Furthermore, if you take a full-round action to line up a shot, you get an automatic hit with a melee weapon or a +5 bonus on attack rolls with a ranged weapon.  Acid and sonic attacks deal damage to most objects just as they do to creatures. Electricity and fire attacks deal half damage to most objects. Cold attacks deal one-quarter damage to most objects.  Ranged Weapon Damage Objects take half damage from ranged weapons, unless the weapon is a siege engine.  Ineffective Weapons The DM can rule that certain weapons just can’t effectively deal damage to certain objects.  Immunities Objects are immune to nonlethal damage and to critical hits. Even animated objects, which are otherwise considered creatures, have these immunities because they’re constructs.  Vulnerability The DM can rule that certain attacks are especially successful against some objects. Such attacks deal double damage. Some might even ignore the object’s hardness.  Magic Animated Objects Animated objects are creatures. Don’t treat them as inanimate objects.  Each +1 of enhancement bonus adds 2 to the hardness of armor, a weapon, or a shield, and 10 to the item’s hit points.  Illus. by B. Wooten  HARDNESS Each object has hardness— a number that represents how well it resists damage. Whenever an object takes damage, subtract its hardness from that damage. Only damage in excess of its hardness is deducted from the object’s hit points (see the Common Item Hardness and Hit Points table; the Object Hardness and Hit Points table; and the Substance Hardness and Hit Points table).  HIT POINTS An object’s hit point total depends on what it’s made of and how big it is (see the tables). Very large objects can have separate hit point totals for different sections.  Damaged Objects A damaged object remains fully functional until its hit points are reduced to 0, at which point it is destroyed. Damaged objects can be repaired with the Craft skill (PH 70).  SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS  106  When damaging objects, a few special considerations might apply. In all cases, divide or multiply the damage dealt before applying the object’s hardness.  SAVING THROWS Nonmagical, unattended items never make saving throws. They’re considered to have failed their saving throws. An item being grasped, touched, or worn (attended) by a creature makes saving throws using that creature’s saving throw bonus. Magic items always receive saving throws. A magic item’s Fortitude, Reflex, and Will save bonuses are equal to 2 + 1/2 its caster level. An attended magic item either makes saving throws as its owner, or it uses its own saving throw bonus, whichever is higher.  DISGUISING OBJECTS You can use Disguise to temporarily change the appearance of an object, so that it isn’t evident what the object is. This use of the skill requires time and materials to dress up the object. The DM makes the Disguise check secretly.  Time to Disguise an Object Size of Object Tiny or smaller Small to Large Huge or larger  Time Required 1d6×5 minutes 1d8×10 minutes 1d10×20 minutes  The object’s disguise can’t include an apparent change of size or weight of more than one-tenth the original unless specially crafted accessories are used (requiring a separate Craft check). Your Disguise check result is opposed by the Search checks of anyone looking at the item or otherwise searching the area where the object is located.  Common Item Hardness and Hit Points  1 The hit point value given is for Medium armor, weapons, and shields. Divide by 2 for each size category the item is smaller than Medium, or multiply by 2 for each size category the item is larger than Medium. 2 Armor has hit points equal to its armor bonus × 5. 3 Hardness varies by material; see the Substance Hardness and Hit Points table.  Object Hardness and Hit Points Object Rope (1 inch diam.) Small chest Treasure chest Chain Manacles Masterwork manacles Hinge Lock  Hardness 0 5 5 10 10 10 10 15  Doors Simple wooden door (1 in. thick) 5 Good wooden door (1-1/2 in. thick) 5 Strong wooden door (2 in. thick) 5 Stone door (4 in. thick) 8 Iron door (2 in. thick) 10 Ice door (1-1/2 ft. thick) 0 Glass door (6 in. thick) 1  hp 2 1 15 5 10 10 30 30 10 15 20 60 60 54 6  Substance Paper or cloth Rope Glass Ice Leather or hide Wood Stone Iron or steel Mithral Adamantine  Hardness 0 0 1 0 2 5 8 10 15 20  hp1 2 2 1 3 5 10 15 30 30 40  1 Hit points are per inch of thickness  Size and Armor Class of Objects Size (Example) AC Modifier Colossal (broad side of a barn) –8 Gargantuan (narrow side of a barn) –4 Huge (wagon) –2 Large (big door) –1 Medium (barrel) +0 Small (chair) +1 Tiny (book) +2 Diminutive (scroll) +4 Fine (potion) +8  OBJECTS  Item Hardness hp1 Light blade 10 2 One-handed blade 10 5 Two-handed blade 10 10 Light metal-hafted weapon 10 10 One-handed metal-hafted weapon 10 20 Light hafted weapon 5 2 One-handed hafted weapon 5 5 Two-handed hafted weapon 5 10 Projectile weapon 5 5 Potion vial 1 1 Ring 10 2 Rod 10 10 Scroll 0 1 Staff 5 10 Wand 5 5 Armor2, 3 —see notes— Buckler 10 5 Light wooden shield 5 7 Heavy wooden shield 5 15 Light steel shield 10 10 Heavy steel shield 10 20 Tower shield 5 20  Substance Hardness and Hit Points  BREAKING OBJECTS When a creature tries to break something with sudden force rather than by dealing damage, use a Strength check (including a modifier due to size) to see whether it succeeds. The DC depends more on the construction of the item than on the material.  Breaking Items Task Bend iron bars Break down simple wooden door Break down good wooden door Break down glass door Break down strong wooden door Break down ice door Break down door barred with wood Break down door barred with iron Break down iron or stone door Break open a small chest Break open a treasure chest Burst a strand of rope1 Burst chain Burst manacles Burst masterwork manacles Condition Item at 1/2 hit points Hold portal2 Arcane lock 2  DC 24 13 18 18 23 25 25 25 28 17 23 23 26 26 28 DC Modifier –2 +5 +10  1 If a creature is bound with the rope, add the binder’s Use Rope check result to this DC. 2 If more than one of these conditions applies, use the larger number.  107  Overrun You can attempt an overrun as a standard action taken during your movement. This is an exception to the rule that you can’t take a standard action during movement. With an overrun, you attempt to plow past or over a defender and move through that creature’s space as you move. You can overrun a defender who is one size category larger than you or smaller. You can make only one overrun attempt per round.  INITIATING AN OVERRUN OVERRUN  You begin the overrun by moving into the defender’s space, so you provoke an attack of opportunity from the defender. You also provoke attacks of opportunity as normal for your movement.  RESOLVING AN OVERRUN A defender can avoid you or block you when you overrun.  Illus. by M. Cotie  Defender Avoids If the defender avoids you, it doesn’t suffer any ill effect, and you can keep moving, since you can always move through a square occupied by someone who lets you by. The overrun doesn’t cost a standard action, but the movement required to enter the defender’s space counts against your movement for the round.  Defender Blocks If the defender blocks you, make a Strength check opposed by the defender’s Dexterity or Strength check—whichever ability score has the higher modifier. A combatant gets a +4 bonus on the check for every size category it is larger than Medium or a –4 penalty for every size category it is smaller than Medium. The defender gets a +4 bonus on the check if it has more than two legs or is otherwise more stable than a normal humanoid. If you win, you knock the defender prone. It must use a move action that provokes attacks of opportunity to stand up again. If you lose, the defender can immediately react and make a Strength check opposed by your Dexterity or Strength check—including the size modifiers noted above, but no other modifiers—to try to knock you prone.  OVERRUN RESULTS If you succeed in knocking the defender prone, you can continue your movement as normal. If you fail and are knocked prone in turn, you have to move 5 feet back the way you came and fall prone, ending your movement there. If you fail but aren’t knocked prone, you have to move 5 feet back the way you came, ending your movement there. If that square is occupied, you fall prone in that square.     OVERRUN WITH CONFIDENCE Overrun is actually an extremely effective tactic for a Medium character to use against smaller opponents such as goblins or kobolds, especially if getting past such foes is more important than fighting them. Overrun can be effective for moving in and among weaker foes as well, setting you up for using Cleave or Great Cleave. A strong monster might want to use overrun to get at the wizard or archer who dealt a lot of damage last round. Many players have an irrational fear of provoking attacks of opportunity from weak foes. Obviously, you don’t want to give a powerful creature more swings at you—but if you’re dealing with a skirmish line of low-level goblin warriors that can hit you only on a high attack roll, you shouldn’t be afraid to provoke attacks of opportunity. In other words, if you have a high AC and you’re fighting enemies you outclass, don’t let  the attack of opportunity stop you from trying an overrun (or any other option that provokes attacks of opportunity, for that matter). But remember, you should weigh the odds of a successful overrun. If your Strength check modifier (including size modifier) is 10 better than your enemy’s, you win about 88% of the time. If you’re a Medium character who has an 18 Strength, you have a check modifier of +4. A Small creature that has a 12 Dexterity—for example, a goblin warrior—has a check modifier of –3. If that goblin is smart, he’ll just get out of the way. If you think you might be interested in using this tactic, take the Improved Overrun feat. Not only does your enemy lose the ability to just avoid you, but you also gain a +4 bonus on your Strength checks to win the overrun! —Rich Baker, designer     108  Poison All sorts of toxins exist in nature and among monsters. Although supernatural and spell-like poisons are possible, poison is almost always extraordinary.  DAMAGE FROM POISON  POISON EFFECTIVENESS One dose of poison smeared on a weapon or some other object affects just a single target. The size of the object the poison is applied to doesn’t matter. A poisoned weapon or object retains its venom until the weapon scores a hit or the object is touched. Any poison smeared on an object or exposed to the elements in any way remains potent until it’s touched or used. Poison can be wiped off an object.  POISON TYPES Poisons are divided into four types, according to the method by which their effect is delivered.  Contact Merely touching this type of poison necessitates a saving throw. A weapon attack or a touch attack can actively deliver it. Even if a creature has sufficient damage reduction to avoid taking any damage from the attack, the poison can still affect it. An object can be smeared with contact poison as part of a trap.  Ingested Ingested poisons are virtually impossible to utilize in a combat situation. One could administer a poison to an unconscious creature, or dupe someone into drinking or eating something poisoned. Assassins and other characters use ingested poisons outside combat.  Inhaled poisons are usually contained in fragile containers. They can be thrown as a ranged attack with a range increment of 10 feet. When the container strikes a hard surface (or is struck hard), it releases its poison. One dose spreads to fi ll the volume of a 10-foot cube. Each creature within the area must make a saving throw. Holding one’s breath is ineffective against inhaled poisons; they affect the nasal membranes, tear ducts, and other parts of the body.  Injury This type of poison must be delivered through a wound. If a creature has sufficient damage reduction to avoid taking any damage from the attack, the poison doesn’t affect it. Traps that cause damage from weapons, needles, and the like sometimes contain injury poisons.  POISON  When a creature takes damage from an attack that delivers poison, it must make a Fortitude saving throw against a DC specified for the poison. If the save fails, the creature takes the poison’s initial damage. Even if the save succeeds, the poison has the potential to deal its secondary damage 1 minute later, which the poisoned creature can avoid with another successful Fortitude saving throw. In poison descriptions, initial and secondary damage is usually identified. Some monster entries divide initial and secondary damage by a slash (/)—initial damage comes before the slash, and secondary damage after. Each instance of poisoning damages a poisoned creature separately. In the case of poisons that have nondamaging effects, those effects don’t stack, but each one runs for its full duration.  Inhaled  BUYING POISON Many poisons are sold in doses, with a cost in gold pieces given for each dose. It isn’t possible to use or apply poison in any quantity smaller than one dose. The purchase and possession of poison is always illegal, and even in big cities it can be obtained only from illicit sources.  PERILS OF USING POISON Unless otherwise noted, a creature has a 5% chance of exposing itself to a poison whenever it applies that poison to a weapon or otherwise readies the poison for use. Additionally, a creature that rolls a natural 1 on an attack roll with a poisoned weapon must succeed on a DC 15 Reflex save or accidentally poison itself with the weapon. Neither form of accidental exposure uses up a dose of poison, whether it’s on a weapon or not.  TREATING POISON Someone can use the Heal skill to tend a single creature that is going to take more damage or suffer some other effect from being poisoned. Every time the poisoned creature makes a saving throw against the poison, the healer makes a Heal check. The poisoned creature uses the Heal check result or a saving throw result, whichever is higher.  POISON IMMUNITIES A creature that has a natural poison special attack is immune to its own poison and the poison of others of its kind. Other creatures can be immune to poison according to their description or type.     POISONOUS SIMULATION In earlier editions of D&D, poison killed you outright or had a chance to kill you or deal you a lot of damage—even on a successful saving throw. In D&D’s 3rd Edition, poison became a subtler, scarier effect. It dealt ability damage, of which only half was likely to affect a victim during a particular battle. The idea to split up poison’s full effect grew out of the desire to model how a real-world poison works. Poison isn’t an all-or-nothing spike. It’s something you worry about the  whole time it’s around. “Hey, I feel sick—I think I’ve been poisoned!” As a player who enjoys rogue characters, I’ve noticed I’ve become less and less interested in using poison. Why? Because poison in the hands of a player character plays differently than poison from a monster. When a PC poisons an opponent during a fight, the fight often concludes before the second part of the poison has a chance to affect that foe. So poison is really only half as effective for a player character. Ouch. —Bruce R. Cordell, designer     109  READY Illus. by S. Prescott  Ready Ready lets you prepare to take an action later, after your turn is over but before your next one has begun.  HOW TO READY Readying is a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity, though the action that you ready might provoke attacks of opportunity when you take that action. You can ready a standard action, a move action, a swift action, or a free action. To do so, you must specify what you want to do and the conditions under which you will do so. Then, any time before your next turn, you can take the readied action in response to those conditions. The action occurs just before whatever triggers it. If the triggering condition is part of another creature’s activities, you interrupt that creature’s turn. Assuming the interrupted creature is still capable of doing so, it continues its turn once you complete your readied action.  Movement and Readying You can take a 5-foot step as part of your readied action, but only if you don’t otherwise move any distance during the round.  CONSEQUENCES OF READYING When you take your readied action, your new initiative count changes to the one on which you acted. You act immediately before any creature whose activities triggered your readied action. Your initiative count is lower for the rest of the combat if you acted later in the same round during which you decided to ready. If you take your readied action in the round after the one during which you chose to ready, but before your original initiative count comes up, your initiative count rises to the one on which you acted for the rest of the combat. You don’t get the turn that would have occurred on your original initiative count.     READY WISELY If delay is about waiting for circumstances to determine your action, ready is about choosing the circumstances that trigger your action. But what if that circumstance doesn’t happen? Think of a ready action like a basic computer program: if this happens, then this occurs. As anyone who works with computers knows, the “garbage in, garbage out” rule always applies. If you’re not specific enough with your proposed ready action, then your result might not be exactly what you hoped for. And if you’re too specific, the condition might not be met and you’ve lost a round’s worth of actions.  Use ready sparingly, only when you’re certain that the triggering event will occur and that you’re willing to follow through on your readied action. If you’re not absolutely sure that the orc shaman you’re talking to is just waiting for the rest of his tribe to show up, maybe it’s best not to ready an attack until you’re certain about his intentions. But if you are, and you’re willing to take the consequences, ready away! —Michele Carter, editor     110  One of the great strengths of tabletop roleplaying games is that they allow characters to attempt anything the players can imagine. The open-ended nature of most RPGs, and the presence of a living arbiter (the DM), allow for a range of actions far beyond what any board game, card game, or computer game can handle. Ironically, the place where many RPG systems break down is when they attempt to simulate actions and aspects of the “real world.” Although a certain level of believability must be achieved, many designers and players strive for a level of simulation far beyond what’s necessary to for a game. Is it “realistic” that every player in Monopoly starts with exactly the same amount of money, that players have a 1-in-6 chance of being released from Jail each turn they’re incarcerated, or that a shoe can amass property and collect rental payments? Of course not, but nobody playing Monopoly complains about such things. Everyone accepts a certain level of abstraction for fun game play. Every edition of D&D has struggled to find the right balance between simulation and abstraction that achieves maximum playability and fun. Overall, the game leans more heavily toward abstraction, and that’s not an accident. Not only does the game focus on elements way beyond the realms of reality, but it also consciously requires the characters to perform heroic, even superheroic, actions. The important caveat to any abstract system is that even an abstracted activity must be acceptably believable to the players. That is, the participants in the game must believe that the in-game outcome could have occurred in the situation in question. That “believability factor” is relative, not absolute. It varies based on the core assumptions of the game, the setting, and even the playing group. What’s believable in one game might not be in another. Casually leaping 20 feet from a standing start sounds unbelievable . . . unless you’re playing a wuxiainfluenced game. In that case, it’s pedestrian. A group of expert climbers might demand more simulationist aspects in a climbing system, because their advanced expertise doesn’t allow them to “believe” in the outcomes that result from the rules. That’s the same reason why many doctors can’t enjoy medical dramas on TV. Although the average viewer can accept and enjoy week after week of bizarre cases and wayout-there diagnoses, it’s so far removed from the professional’s real-life experiences and expertise that she just can’t bring herself to believe the show enough to appreciate the entertainment value. I can only imagine how “unrealistic” a show on game designers would seem to me and the folks I work with. It’s tempting to look at a rule and imagine how to make it more realistic. Whenever this temptation rears its ugly head, just ask yourself if the added realism actually increases smooth, fun game play. The answer is usually “No”—just  like a “realistic” cop or doctor show would be pretty boring to watch. (Oh, goody, another episode of paperwork!) In D&D, halfl ings are almost as strong as humans. In a realistic game, these pint-size characters would have the muscle of a 10-year-old. Of course, then they’d be unable to do much in combat. Instead, D&D abstracts the difference between the two races, pushing them closer together to ensure that halflings are playable. They’re still weaker than humans—that’s the believability factor—but not so much weaker as to be unplayable. In D&D, characters bounce back from injuries with no real consequences. In a realistic game, a character who actually manages to survive being clawed, gnawed, and flash-fried by a red dragon as big as a house would be in a hospital for weeks, and (assuming he could still walk at all) would walk with a limp for the rest of his life. Of course, that makes it a little hard to continue the adventure, so D&D abstracts character injuries and recovery with the hit point system. Massive injuries can certainly kill even a powerful character, and coming back from death takes its toll. That’s the believability factor. But virtually any injury can be repaired relatively quickly if you have the right resources, which allows the game to keep rolling. Players carry out melee combats by rolling dice and moving minis around a grid on a turn-by-turn basis in D&D. In a realistic game, combat would be incredibly chaotic and uncontrolled, with many more interruptions and missteps, and a lot less finesse. Of course, that would make combat scenes drag on forever, result in a lot of wasted actions, and encourage endless timing arguments. Instead, D&D encourages players to recreate their favorite action movie stunts (or create their own) within a fast-paced combat system by minimizing the number of variables and actions they have to track. It keeps order by having each participant take turns. This system sacrifices many elements of simulation in order to achieve the desired level of playability, but the resulting action remains reasonable enough to pass the average player’s believability test. Put simply, no game can perfectly simulate reality. If it did, it wouldn’t be a game any more, it’d be real life. (Who wants to buy a copy of that?) It might be more realistic for Monopoly players to start with different amounts of money, but that wouldn’t make the game more fun. If D&D perfectly simulated battling a horde of raging barbarians, it would not only cost a lot more money to purchase (those actors don’t come cheap), it would result in a lot more lawsuits. Abstraction is the game player’s (and game designer’s) best friend. It lets us recreate an endless array of activities we’d never be able to (or want to) accomplish in real life. What’s more, it lets us do so quickly and efficiently, maximizing the play and minimizing the rule-searching. When it’s done right, abstraction actually improves our immersion into the game’s own version of reality. Actions within the game flow so naturally and intuitively that we forget that we’re bounded by rules at all. Personally, I can’t think of any greater achievement in game design.  INTERLUDE: ABSTRACTION OR SIMULATION  Abstraction orby Andy Simulation Collins, developer  111  Saving Throws When you’re subjected to an unusual or magical attack, you make a saving throw (or save) to avoid or reduce the effect. Like an attack roll, a saving throw is a d20 roll plus modifiers from several possible factors.  SAVING THROWS  Saving throw bonus = base save bonus + ability modifier + racial bonus + resistance bonus + other modifiers  SUCCESS AND FAILURE If the result of the saving throw roll equals or exceeds the save’s DC, the saving throw succeeds. The DC for a save is determined by the attack. A creature that successfully saves against an effect that has no obvious physical repercussions feels a hostile force or a tingle, but can’t deduce the exact nature of the attack. Likewise, if a creature’s saving throw succeeds against a targeted effect, the effect’s creator senses that the effect has failed. A caster can’t sense when creatures succeed on saves against effect spells or area spells, or against similar abilities.  AUTOMATIC FAILURE AND SUCCESS  Illus. by C. Dulac, UDON & J. Zubkavich  A natural 1 (the d20 comes up 1) on a saving throw is always a failure, and the attack that forced the save might cause damage to exposed items—see Items Surviving, below. A natural 20 (the d20 comes up 20) is always a success.  112  VOLUNTARILY FAILING A creature can voluntarily forego a saving throw and willingly accept a consequence.  ITEMS SURVIVING Unless the descriptive text for an effect specifies otherwise, all items carried or worn by a creature are assumed to survive a magical attack. If a creature rolls a natural 1 on its saving  throw against the effect, however, an exposed item is harmed if the attack can harm objects. Refer to the following table. Determine which four objects carried or worn by the creature are most likely to be affected and roll randomly among them. The randomly determined item must make a saving throw against the attack form and, if the save fails, take whatever damage the attack deals. If an item isn’t carried or worn, and isn’t magical, it doesn’t get a saving throw. It simply takes the appropriate damage.  Items Affected by Magical Attacks Order1 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th  Item Shield Armor Magic helmet, hat, or headband Item in hand (including weapon, wand, or the like) Magic cloak Stowed or sheathed weapon Magic bracers Magic clothing Magic jewelry (including rings) Anything else  1 In order from most likely to least likely to be affected.  SAVING THROW TYPES The three different kinds of saving throws are Fortitude, Reflex, and Will.  Fortitude Fortitude saves reflect physical toughness. They incorporate stamina, ruggedness, physique, bulk, metabolism, resistance, immunity, and other similar physical qualities. If an effect seems like something that a tough person would be good at avoiding, it’s a Fortitude save. Apply your Constitution modifier to your Fortitude saving throws.  Reflex  Will Will saves reflect inner strength. They incorporate willpower, mental stability, the power of the mind, levelheadedness, determination, self-confidence, self-awareness, the superego, and resistance to temptation. If an effect seems like something that a confident or determined person would be good at avoiding, it’s a Will save. Apply your Wisdom modifier to your Will saving throws.  AGAINST MAGIC ITEMS Most magic item descriptions give saving throw DCs for the item’s various effects. If not, the DC can be derived from this formula: Magic item saving throw DC = 10 + (1-1/2 × the level of the spell or effect)  Staffs and runestaffs (see Magic Item Compendium 223) are exceptions to this rule. Treat the saving throw DCs for these items as if the wielder had cast the spell, including caster level and all modifiers to the save DC.  AGAINST SPECIAL ATTACKS Some creatures have special abilities that require saving throws to resist. Any sort of special ability—extraordinary, spell-like, or supernatural, might allow a saving throw. Special ability saving throw DC = 10 + 1/2 the creature’s HD + the modifier for the ability score on which the ability is based + other modifiers (often racial)  Spell-like abilities are an exception to this general rule. Spell-like ability saving throw DC = 10 + the level of the spell the ability resembles or duplicates + the creature’s Cha modifier + other modifiers (often racial)  Spell level is usually equal to the level of the sorcerer/wizard version of a spell. If the spell has no such version, use the version that makes the most sense for the creature.  A spell’s level can vary depending on your class. Always use the spell level applicable to your class. The relevant ability score varies by spellcasting class.  TERMS FOR SAVES Specific terms further define how a save works, and these terms are commonly used in spell descriptions, class features, and monster special abilities. Those terms include the following. Negates: The effect has no consequences for a subject that makes a successful saving throw. Partial: The effect has consequences. A successful saving throw means that those consequences are diminished as detailed in the spell or ability description. Half: The effect deals damage, and a successful saving throw halves that damage. None: No saving throw is allowed. Disbelief: A successful save lets the subject ignore the effect. (object): The effect can be used on objects, which receive saving throws only if they’re magical or if they’re attended by a creature resisting the effect, in which case the object uses the creature’s saving throw bonus unless its own bonus is greater. A magic item’s saving throw bonuses are each equal to 2 + 1/2 the item’s caster level. This notation doesn’t mean that an effect can be used only on objects. Some effects of this sort can be cast on creatures and/or objects. (harmless): The effect is usually beneficial, but a targeted creature can attempt a saving throw if it desires.  SAVING THROWS  Reflex saves reflect physical (and sometimes mental) agility. They incorporate quickness, nimbleness, hand-eye coordination, overall coordination, speed, and reaction time. If an effect seems like something that an agile person would be good at avoiding, it’s a Reflex save. Apply your Dexterity modifier to your Reflex saving throws. You can make a Reflex save whenever one is called for, but your Dexterity or whether you can apply its modifier might be altered by the situation.  SPECIAL SAVE ABILITIES Special abilities can affect the results of a saving throw. The most common special abilities of this type are evasion, improved evasion, and mettle.  Evasion and Improved Evasion Evasion and improved evasion allow the target of an area attack to leap or twist out of the way. If a creature that has evasion is subjected to an attack that allows a Reflex save for half damage, it takes no damage on a successful save. Improved evasion is like evasion, except that even on a failed saving throw a creature that has improved evasion takes only half damage. A creature must have room to move to evade. A bound creature or one squeezing through an area can’t use evasion. Evasion and improved evasion are reflexive abilities. A creature that has one of these abilities need not know that the attack is coming to use the ability. Sometimes a creature that has evasion or improved evasion can’t use the ability while wearing medium or heavy armor. This is true only if the ability’s description says so.  Mettle  AGAINST SPELLS The Saving Throw line in a spell description defines which type of saving throw the spell allows and describes how saving throws against the spell work. Spell saving throw DC = 10 + the level of the spell + the bonus for the spellcaster’s relevant ability score  Mettle is an ability that allows a creature to shrug off magical effects that are reduced in efficacy when the subject makes a successful Will or Fortitude saving throw, such as any spell with a saving throw entry of Will partial or Fortitude half. By making a successful saving throw, a creature that has mettle instead negates such an effect. An unconscious or sleeping creature doesn’t gain the benefit of mettle.  113  Senses Most creatures can see and hear using the skills Listen and Spot, and they can focus their attention by using Search. Other senses also come into play from time to time.  SENSES  LISTEN (WIS) Every time a creature has a chance to hear something, that creature can make a Listen check without using an action. Trying to hear something one failed to hear previously is a move action. A Listen check is either made against a DC that reflects how quiet the noise is, or it is opposed by another creature’s Move Silently check. A successful Listen check allows you to tell the general location of or direction to the sound. If understanding the actual content of a sound is important, beating the DC by 10 allows you to do so, assuming you can otherwise understand that content. Beating the DC by 20 allows you to pinpoint where a sound is coming from.  Listen Sound A battle People talking People whispering  DC –10 0 15  Condition DC Modifier Ambient noise +5 Loud ambient noise +10 Extremely loud ambient noise +15 Through a door +5 Through a stone wall +15 Per 10 feet of distance1 +1 Per 20 feet of distance over water1 +1 Per 30 feet of distance underwater1 +1 Listener distracted +5 Listener sleeping2 +10 Land creature underwater3 +10 1 Pick one of these that most applies. 2 A successful check awakens the listener. 3 Nonaquatic creatures without natural swim speed.  SPOT (WIS) Every time a creature has a chance to see something, that creature can make a Spot check without using an action. Trying to spot something one failed to see previously is a move action. A Spot check is either made against a DC that reflects how hard something is to see, or it is opposed by  another creature’s Hide check. A creature must have line of sight to make a Spot check.  Spot Condition Per 10 feet of distance Spotter distracted  Check Penalty –1 –5  OTHER USES Spot is also used to detect a disguise (opposed by a Disguise check) and to read lips.  Read Lips To understand what someone is saying by reading lips, a lip reader must be within 30 feet of the speaker, have line of sight to that creature, do nothing other than move at half speed, and understand the speaker’s language. The base DC is 15, but it increases for complex speech or an inarticulate speaker. The DM makes the check in secret. If the Spot check succeeds, the lip reader can understand the general content of a minute’s worth of speaking, but might miss certain details. If the check fails by 4 or less, the lip reader can’t make out what’s said. If the check fails by 5 or more, the lip reader draws an incorrect conclusion about the speech.  SEARCH (INT) The Search skill lets a creature discern something through active effort. A searcher must be within 10 feet of the object or surface to be searched. It takes a full-round action that provokes attacks of opportunity to search a 5-foot-by-5-foot area or a volume of goods 5 feet on a side. The following table gives DCs for typical tasks involving the Search skill.  Search Task DC Search a full chest to find an item 10 Notice a secret door or a simple trap 20 Find a difficult nonmagical trap1 21 or higher Find a magic trap1 25 + level of spell Notice a well-hidden secret door 30 Find a footprint Varies2 1 Only a creature that has trapfinding can perform this sort of Search check and succeed. 2 A successful check can find a sign of a creature’s passage but doesn’t let you find or follow a trail. See Track, page 144.     MAKING SENSE(S) The senses that appear here aren’t the only game in town. Woodsense (greenvise) showed up in Monster Manual II and keen scent (dragon eel), psychic sense (runehound), and wavesense (swamp strider swarm) in Monster Manual III. Most of these were modified versions of the “glossary senses.” The newest statistics block format has a “senses” entry, and Monster Manual IV made full use of it. Dweomersight lets the  balhannoth lock on to those tasty magic items, and the mageripper swarm’s sense magic does the same while also tracking down spellcasters. The joystealer’s sense emotions ability is—unless you’re undead—even better at catching you than tremorsense. —Logan Bonner, editor     114  OTHER SENSES If it becomes important whether a creature actually senses something specific when smelling, tasting, or touching, a Wisdom check suffices. Set the DC reasonably based on the sensation’s strength. Knowledge checks or Appraise checks might be appropriate supplements to senses, depending on what a creature is trying to find out.  EXTRAORDINARY SENSES Some creatures have senses that are extraordinary abilities. Even if a creature that has blindsight is blind, it maneuvers and fights as well as a sighted creature. The range of a creature’s blindsight is specified in the creature’s descriptive text. Invisibility, darkness, and most kinds of concealment are irrelevant to a creature that has blindsight, though the creature must have line of effect to a creature or object to discern that creature or object. A creature that has blindsight usually doesn’t need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice and locate creatures within range of its blindsight ability. Blindsight doesn’t subject a creature to gaze attacks. Blindsight doesn’t distinguish color or visual contrast. A creature can’t read using blindsight. Blinding attacks don’t work on creatures using blindsight. Deafening attacks thwart blindsight if the blindsight relies on hearing. Blindsight works underwater but not in a vacuum. Unless otherwise noted, blindsight is continuous, and the creature need do nothing to use it. Some forms of blindsight, however, must be triggered as a free action. If a creature must trigger its blindsight ability, the creature gains the benefit of blindsight only during its turn.  BLINDSENSE A creature that has blindsense notices creatures and objects it can’t see, but without the precision of blindsight. The range of a creature’s blindsense is specified in the creature’s descriptive text. A creature that has blindsense usually doesn’t need to make Spot or Listen checks to notice and locate creatures within range of its blindsense ability, provided that it has line of effect to such creatures. Any opponent the creature can’t see still has total concealment against a creature relying on blindsense, and the blindsensing creature still has the normal miss chance when attacking foes that have concealment. Conditions that affect visibility still affect the movement of a creature that has blindsense. A creature that has blindsense is still denied its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class against attacks from creatures it can’t see.  DARKVISION Darkvision is the ability to see with no light source at all, out to a range specified for the creature. A creature using darkvision can’t discern colors. The presence of light doesn’t spoil darkvision. Darkvision doesn’t allow creatures to see anything that they couldn’t see otherwise. Likewise, darkvision subjects a creature to gaze attacks normally.  Creatures that have low-light vision can see twice as far as normal in dim light. Low-light vision allows a creature that can read to do so with even the tiniest source of light. Those that have low-light vision can see outdoors on a moonlit night as well as a human can during the day. Superior low-light vision allows a creature to see even farther in conditions of shadowy illumination, usually four times as far as normal.  SCENT This ability lets a creature detect creatures and track by sense of smell. Creatures with the scent ability can identify familiar odors just as humans do familiar sights.  Detecting Creatures  SENSES  BLINDSIGHT  LOW-LIGHT VISION  A creature that has the scent ability can detect other creatures by sense of smell, usually within 30 feet. Upwind, the range is 60 feet. Downwind, the range is 15 feet. Strong scents, such as smoke or rotting garbage, can be detected at twice the ranges noted above. Overpowering scents, such as skunk musk or troglodyte stench, can be detected at three times these ranges. A creature that has scent detects another creature’s presence but not its specific location. Noting the direction of the scent is a move action. If a creature with scent moves within 5 feet of a scent’s source, the creature can pinpoint that source. Powerful odors can easily mask other scents. The presence of such an odor completely spoils the ability to properly detect or identify creatures.  Tracking by Smell A creature that has the Track feat and the scent ability can follow tracks by smell. See Track, page 144.  TREMORSENSE A creature that has tremorsense is sensitive to vibrations in the ground and can automatically pinpoint the location of anything that is in contact with the ground within range and is not totally still. A creature that has tremorsense must also be in contact with the ground, and the creatures it’s trying to sense must be taking physical actions, including casting spells with somatic components. Creatures don’t have to move from place to place for a creature that has tremorsense to detect them. If no direct path exists through the ground from the creature that has tremorsense to those it’s sensing, then the ability’s range defines the maximum distance of the shortest indirect path. Aquatic creatures that have tremorsense can also sense the location of creatures moving through water, as long as the creature that has tremorsense is in contact with the same water.  115  Size The nine size categories, in order from smallest to largest, are Fine, Diminutive, Tiny, Small, Medium, Large, Huge, Gargantuan, and Colossal. A creature’s size provides a modifier to its Armor Class and attack bonus, on grapple checks, on Hide checks, and a modifier to break open doors. Size also determines how much space a creature takes up and how far it can reach, as well as how much a creature can carry.  SIZE AND COMBAT SIZE  Creatures smaller than Small or larger than Medium have special rules relating to position in combat.  LITTLE CREATURES Tiny, Diminutive, and Fine creatures take up less than 1 square of space apiece. Twenty-five Diminutive creatures or 100 Fine creatures can fit into a single 5-foot square. A Tiny creature occupies a space 2-1/2 feet across, so four can fit into a single square. Creatures that take up less than 1 square of space typically have a natural reach of 0 feet, meaning they can’t reach into adjacent squares. They must enter an opponent’s square to attack in melee. Doing this provokes an attack of opportunity from the opponent. You can attack into your own square if you need to, so you can attack such creatures normally. Since they have no natural reach, they don’t threaten the squares around them. You can move past them without provoking attacks of opportunity. They also can’t flank an enemy. A creature that has a reach of 0 feet still threatens the square it’s in.  Illus. by M. Cavotta  BIG CREATURES Large, Huge, Gargantuan, and Colossal creatures take up more than 1 square of space. Creatures that take up more than 1 square typically have a natural reach of 10 feet or more, meaning that they can reach targets even if those targets aren’t in adjacent squares.  A creature that has more than 5 feet of natural reach threatens squares adjacent to it and all others within its reach. A creature with greater than normal natural reach usually gets an attack of opportunity against a Medium or smaller creature if such a creature approaches it, because that creature must enter and leave threatened squares to draw near. Large or larger creatures using reach weapons can attack at up to double their natural reach, but they can’t attack within their natural reach or less.  Creature Sizes Size AC/Attack Grapple/Break Hide Carrying Space Reach (Tall) Reach (Long) Category Modifier Modifier Modifier Capacity Dimension1 Weight2 (squares) (squares) (squares) Fine +8 –16 +16 ×1/8 6 in.– 1/8 lb.– 1/2 ft. (1/100) 0 ft. (0) — Diminutive +4 –12 +12 ×1/4 to 1 ft. to 1 lb. 1 ft. (1/25) 0 ft. (0) — Tiny +2 –8 +8 ×1/2 to 2 ft. to 8 lb. 2-1/2 ft. (1/4) 0 ft. (0) — Small +1 –4 +4 ×3/4 to 4 ft. to 60 lb. 5 ft. (1) 5 ft. (1) — Medium +0 +0 +0 ×1 to 8 ft. to 500 lb. 5 ft. (1) 5 ft. (1) 5 ft. (1) Large –1 +4 –4 ×2 to 16 ft. to 2 tons 10 ft. (2×2) 10 ft. (2) 5 ft. (1) Huge –2 +8 –8 ×4 to 32 ft. to 16 tons 15 ft. (3×3) 15 ft. (3) 10 ft. (2) Gargantuan –4 +12 –12 ×8 to 64 ft. to 125 tons 20 ft. (4×4) 20 ft. (4) 15 ft. (3) Colossal –8 +16 –16 ×16 64 ft.+ 125+ 30 ft.+ (6×6+) 30 ft.+ (6+) 20 ft.+ (4+) 1 Biped’s height, quadruped’s body length (nose to base of tail). 2 Assumes that the creature is roughly as dense as a regular animal.     CARRY A BIG STICK As one of the folks who worked on Races of Stone, I became quickly enamored of goliaths, and I immediately petitioned my DM to let me roll up a goliath cleric. Over the course of several adventures, I realized just how good “being Large in all the good ways and none of the bad” was. Sure, it’s all spelled out in the powerful build racial trait, but how often do you think being Large for the purpose of being swallowed whole will come up? All I saw, power gamer that  I am, was “You can swing a BIG club!” But holding your own in a wrestling match with an ogre, resisting a hill giant’s bull rush, and not getting tripped by that spiked chain wielder all made a much bigger difference to me—rare though those occurrences were—at the moments they happened. And these were the memorable moments in my character’s life within the campaign, rather than the fact that I assaulted evildoers with a tree trunk. —Chris Thomasson, editor     116  Sleight of Hand If you’re trained in Sleight of Hand, you can cut a purse and hide it on your person, palm an unattended object, hide a light weapon in your clothing, or perform some feat of legerdemain with an object no larger than a loaf of bread.  SLEIGHT OF HAND  Condition Check Modifier Wearing baggy or heavy clothing (cloak) +2 Object is a dagger +2 Object is extraordinarily small (coin, ring, shuriken) +4 Make check as a move action –20 Condition Try again against same observer after failing  DC Modifier +10  when the dagger suddenly appears in your hand. For this technique to work, you must have a dagger sheathed on your person, must have the Quick Draw feat, and must be holding nothing in your off hand. You must fight the same foe for at least 2 consecutive rounds to make your opponent used to the idea that you have nothing in your off hand. At the beginning of your turn during the third round, use Quick Draw to draw the sheathed dagger as a free action with your off hand. Then make a Sleight of Hand check opposed by your opponent’s Spot check. If you win, your foe is considered flat-footed for the next single attack you make with the dagger now in your off hand. Regardless of your success, the same foe won’t fall for the same trick from you twice during the same encounter.  UNOBTRUSIVE SPELLCASTING As part of casting a spell, you can make a Sleight of Hand check to make your verbal and somatic components less obtrusive, muttering magic words under your breath and making magic gestures surreptitiously. Your Sleight of Hand check is opposed by any observer’s Spot check. The observer’s success doesn’t prevent you from casting the spell, but it keeps you from doing it unnoticed.  Illus. by C. Frank  The accompanying table delineates Sleight of Hand tasks and their DCs. Although Sleight of Hand is technically a “trained only” skill, if you have no ranks in it, you can make a Dexterity check to hide an object on your person or to perform any Sleight of Hand task that has a DC of 10 or lower. A Sleight of Hand check is normally a standard action. When you use this skill under close observation, your skill check is opposed by the observer’s Spot check. The observer’s success doesn’t prevent you from performing the act, but it keeps you from doing it unnoticed. When you use Sleight of Hand to Hide an object on your person, your check is opposed by the Search check of anyone frisking you. In this case, the searcher gains a +4 bonus on the Search check—it’s easier to find an object than to hide it on your person. If you try to take something from another creature, you must succeed on a DC 20 Sleight of Hand check. The opponent makes a Spot check to detect the attempt, opposed by the same Sleight of Hand check result you achieved when you tried to take the item. An opponent who succeeds on this check notices the attempt, regardless of whether you got the item. The DM is free to limit what you can take in this manner—coin purses and tiny weapons are fair game, but securely worn items, such as bracers of armor, are not. If the creature you’re taking something from knows you’re trying to do so, it can resist, forcing you to use the disarm (page 45) or grapple (page 60) rules rather than these. You can use Sleight of Hand to entertain as though you were using the Perform skill. In such a case, your act includes elements of legerdemain, juggling, and so on. You can try Sleight of Hand checks again. After an initial failure, a second Sleight of Hand attempt against the same target (or while you’re being watched by the same observer who noticed your previous attempt) increases the DC for the task by 10.  Task DC Palm a coin-sized object, make a coin disappear 10 Lift a small object from a creature 20 Any task while observed Observer’s Spot check Hide an object on your person Searcher’s Search check +4  SLEIGHT OF HAND  (DEX; TRAINED ONLY, ARMOR CHECK PENALTY)  Sleight of Hand  DAGGER SURPRISE If you palm a dagger during a fight, you can surprise your opponent  117  SPECIAL ABILITIES  Special Abilities Many creatures can use special abilities that aren’t magical. These abilities are classified as extraordinary or natural. Some creatures can create magical effects without being spellcasters. Characters using particular class features can also create magical effects. These effects come in two types, spell-like and supernatural. Using a special ability is often a standard action, but whether it’s a standard action, a full-round action, or not an action at all is defined by the ability’s description.  EXTRAORDINARY ABILITIES Extraordinary abilities aren’t magical, though they might break the laws of physics. These abilities can’t be disrupted in combat, as spells can, and they usually don’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Effects or areas that negate or disrupt magic have no effect on extraordinary abilities. They aren’t subject to dispelling, and they function normally in an antimagic field. Using an extraordinary ability is a free action unless otherwise noted. Extraordinary ability saving throw DC = 10 + 1/2 the creature’s HD + the modifier for the ability score on which the ability is based + other modifiers (often racial)  NATURAL ABILITIES This category includes abilities a creature has because of its physical nature, such as a bird’s ability to fly. Natural abilities are those not otherwise designated as extraordinary, supernatural, or spell-like. They’re rarely identified as natural—that’s assumed—and they rarely take a distinct action to use. A lion uses its claws as an attack, for instance; it doesn’t activate its claws and then attack.  SPELL-LIKE ABILITIES Usually, a spell-like ability works just like the spell of that name. A few spell-like abilities are unique; these are explained in the text where they’re described. No verbal, somatic, or material components are required to use a spell-like ability, nor does using one require a focus or have an experience point cost. The user activates it mentally. Armor never affects a spell-like ability’s use, even if the ability resembles an arcane spell with a somatic component.  A spell-like ability usually has a limit on how often it can be used. If a spell-like ability can be used at will, it has no use limit. Using a spell-like ability usually takes 1 standard action and provokes attacks of opportunity unless otherwise noted. If the spell-like ability duplicates a spell that has a casting time of less than 1 standard action, the spell-like ability has that casting time. A spell-like ability can be disrupted just as a spell can be. It’s possible to use a spell-like ability defensively by making a Concentration check (DC 15 + spell level). If the check fails, the ability fails to go off, but the attempt counts against the ability’s use limit. Spell-like abilities are subject to being dispelled by dispel magic and to spell resistance if the spell the ability resembles or duplicates is subject to spell resistance. They don’t function in areas where magic is suppressed or negated, such as in an antimagic field. Spell-like abilities can’t be used to counterspell, nor can they be counterspelled. For creatures that have spell-like abilities, a designated caster level defines how difficult it is to dispel their spell-like effects. This caster level also defines any level-dependent variables, such as range and duration. The creature’s caster level never affects which spell-like abilities the creature has; sometimes the given caster level is lower than the level a spellcasting character must have to cast the spell of the same name. If no caster level is specified, the caster level is equal to the creature’s Hit Dice. Some spell-like abilities duplicate spells that work differently when cast by characters of different classes. A monster’s spell-like abilities are presumed to be the sorcerer/wizard versions. If the spell in question isn’t a sorcerer/wizard spell, then default to cleric, druid, bard, paladin, and ranger, in that order. Spell-like ability saving throw DC = 10 + the level of the spell the ability resembles or duplicates + the creature’s Cha modifier + other modifiers (often racial)  Swift Spell-Like Abilities The addition of immediate actions and swift actions to the game means that using a quickened spell-like ability is now a swift action instead of a free action. (See Action Types, page 7, for more information.)     NAME THAT SPECIAL ABILITY TYPE If you’re ever find yourself waiting for that last player to show up, here’s a quick game you can play. Grab a Monster Manual—it doesn’t matter which one. Open it up to a random spread, and do a quick scan of the special abilities on those two pages. Pick the monster you think has the hardest special ability type to guess, and read its name and the special ability aloud to your friends (leaving out the special ability type designator, of course). As a group, the other players must agree upon one of the special ability types for their answer. If they guess it right, everyone in the group gets the monster’s CR in points. If they don’t, you get the CR in points. Pass the book clockwise and  repeat. Whoever has the most points after one circuit of the book wins. This game is just good geeky silliness. When you start playing it, you’ll get tripped up on things that seem strange at first glance (such as the beholder’s flight—extraordinary!), by effects that are extraordinary for a monster but magical for characters, or traditional spell effects that can be supernatural (such as the pixie’s greater invisibility). Silliness aside, it also increases your familiarity with the game and its exceptions—at least when it comes to monsters and their abilities. —Stephen Radney-MacFarland, developer     118  SUPERNATURAL ABILITIES  Dispel  Supernatural ability saving throw DC = 10 + 1/2 the creature’s HD + the modifier for the ability score on which the ability is based + other modifiers (often racial)  Special Abilities Extraordinary Dispel No Spell resistance No Antimagic field No Attack of opportunity No  Spell-Like Yes Yes Yes Yes  Supernatural No No Yes No  This line indicates whether dispel magic and similar effects dispel the effects of an ability.  Spell Resistance This line indicates whether spell resistance protects a creature from an ability.  Antimagic Field  SPECIAL ABILITIES  Supernatural abilities are magical. They don’t function in areas where magic is suppressed or negated, such as in an antimagic field. However, these abilities can’t be disrupted in combat, as spells can. Supernatural abilities aren’t subject to spell resistance, counterspells, or to being dispelled by dispel magic. Just like spell-like abilities, supernatural abilities might have a use limit or be usable at will. A supernatural ability takes a standard action to use unless otherwise noted in the ability description. Using a supernatural ability doesn’t usually provoke attacks of opportunity. They never require Concentration checks. Unless otherwise noted, a supernatural ability has an effective caster level equal to the creature’s Hit Dice.  This line indicates whether an antimagic field or a similar effect suppresses an ability.  Attack of Opportunity This line indicates whether using an ability provokes attacks of opportunity.  TARGETING SPECIAL ABILITIES An ability’s descriptive text describes how the ability functions, and targeting a special ability that is an attack works like targeting for the attack that the ability most closely resembles. A cone-shaped burst works just like a spell’s cone-shaped burst, while a hurled object works like a ranged attack. Many special abilities augment another sort of action as well.  Illus. by S. Prescott  119  Spell Descriptions Each spell is described in a standard format. Each category of information is explained below or in another entry in this book.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  SCHOOL (SUBSCHOOL) Almost every spell belongs to one of eight schools of magic. A school of magic is a group of related spells that work in similar ways. A small number of spells are universal, belonging to no school. In a spell description, beneath the spell name is a line giving the school of magic (and the subschool, if appropriate) that the spell belongs to.  ABJURATION Abjurations are protective spells. They create physical or magical barriers, negate magical or physical abilities, harm trespassers, or banish the subject of the spell to another plane of existence. If one abjuration spell is active within 10 feet of another for 24 hours or more, the magical fields interfere with each other and create barely visible energy fluctuations. The DC to find such spells with the Search skill drops by 4. If an abjuration creates a barrier that keeps certain types of creatures at bay, that barrier can’t be used to push away those creatures. If you force the barrier against such a creature, you feel a discernible pressure against the barrier. If you continue to apply pressure, you end the spell.  CONJURATION Each conjuration spell belongs to one of five subschools. Conjurations transport creatures from another plane of existence to your plane (calling); create objects or effects on the spot (creation); heal (healing); bring manifestations of objects, creatures, or some form of energy to you (summoning); or transport creatures or objects over great distances (teleportation). A creature or object brought into being or transported to your location by a conjuration spell can’t appear inside another creature or object, nor can it appear floating in an empty space. It must arrive in an open location on a surface capable of supporting it. The creature or object must appear within the spell’s range, but it doesn’t have to remain within the range.  Calling A calling spell transports a creature from another plane to the plane you’re on. The spell grants the creature the one-time ability to return to its plane of origin, although the spell might limit the circumstances under which this is  possible. Creatures that are called actually die when they’re killed—they don’t disappear and re-form, as do those brought by a summoning spell. The duration of a calling spell is instantaneous, which means that the called creature can’t be dispelled.  Creation A creation spell manipulates matter to create an object or creature in the place the spellcaster designates, subject to the limits noted for all conjuration spells. If the spell has a duration other than instantaneous, magic holds the creation together, and when the spell ends, the conjured creature or object vanishes without a trace. If the spell has an instantaneous duration, the created object or creature is merely assembled through magic. It lasts indefi nitely and doesn’t depend on magic for its existence.  Healing Certain conjurations can heal creatures or bring them back to life.  Summoning A summoning spell instantly brings a creature or object to a place you designate. When the spell ends or is dispelled, a summoned creature is instantly sent back to where it came from, but a summoned object isn’t sent back unless the spell’s description specifically indicates this. A summoned creature also goes away if it’s killed or if its hit points drop to 0 or lower. It isn’t really dead. It takes 24 hours for the creature to re-form, during which time it can’t be summoned again. When the spell that summoned a creature ends and the creature disappears, all the spells it has cast end. A summoned creature can’t use any innate summoning abilities it might have. It refuses to use any abilities that cost it experience points or would cost experience points if they were spells.  Teleportation A teleportation spell transports one or more creatures or objects a great distance. The most powerful of these spells can cross planar boundaries. Unlike summoning spells, unless otherwise noted, the transportation is one-way and not dispellable. Teleportation is instantaneous travel through the Astral Plane. Anything that blocks astral travel also blocks teleportation.  DIVINATION Divination spells enable you to learn secrets long forgotten, to predict the future, to find someone or something that has     (SUB) SCHOOLED I was playing in David Noonan’s EBERRON game, and we triggered runes that conjured up some gulthirs (devils described in Monster Manual V). One of them swallowed our rogue and puked her back up, causing her to come under a dominate monster effect. Having our rogue flanking and sneak attacking us isn’t  a top-tier strategy. Since we didn’t want that happening to the rest of our party, our archivist dropped magic circle against evil, which could have kept the gulthirs from eating us—if they’d been summoned instead of . . . called. —Logan Bonner, editor     120  been hidden, and to foil deceptive spells. Many divination spells have cone-shaped areas. These move with you and extend in the direction you look. The cone defines the area that you can sweep each round. If you study the same area for multiple rounds, you can often gain additional information, as noted in the spell’s description.  Scrying  Enchantment spells affect the minds of others, influencing or controlling their behavior. All enchantments are mind-affecting spells. Two types of enchantment spells grant you influence over a subject creature.  Charm A charm spell changes how the subject views you, typically making it see you as a good friend. See Charm, page 28.  Compulsion A compulsion spell forces the subject to act in some manner or changes the way the subject’s mind works. Some compulsion spells dictate what the subject does or the effects on the subject, but other compulsion spells allow you to determine what the subject does when you cast the spell. A few give you ongoing control over the subject. See Compulsion, page 28.  EVOCATION Evocation spells manipulate energy or tap an unseen source of power to produce a desired end. In effect, they create something out of nothing. Many of these spells produce  Illusion spells deceive the senses or minds of others. They cause people to see what isn’t there, not see what is there, hear phantom noises, or remember events that never happened. Saving Throws and Illusions (Disbelief): Creatures encountering an illusion usually don’t receive saving throws to recognize it as illusory until they study it carefully or interact with it in some fashion. A successful saving throw against an illusion reveals it to be false, but a figment or phantasm remains as a translucent outline. A failed saving throw indicates that a creature fails to notice something is amiss. A creature faced with proof that an illusion isn’t real needs no saving throw. If any viewer successfully disbelieves an illusion and communicates this fact to others, each informed viewer can make a new saving throw with a +4 bonus.  Figment A figment spell creates a false sensation. Those who perceive the figment perceive the same thing, not their own slightly different versions of the figment. Figments can’t make something seem to be something else. A figment that includes audible effects can’t duplicate intelligible speech unless the spell’s description specifically says it can. If intelligible speech is possible, it must be in a language you can speak. If you try to duplicate a language you can’t speak, the figment produces gibberish. Likewise, you can’t make a visual copy of something unless you know what it looks like. Because figments and glamers are unreal, they can’t produce real effects the way that other types of illusions can. They can’t cause damage to objects or creatures, support weight, supply nutrition, or provide protection from the elements. Consequently, these spells are useful for confounding or delaying foes but useless for attacking opponents directly. A figment’s AC is equal to 10 + its size modifier.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  ENCHANTMENT  ILLUSION  Illus. by D. Walstrom  A scrying spell creates an invisible magical sensor that sends you information. Unless otherwise noted, the sensor has the same sensory acuity that you possess. This level of acuity includes any spells or effects that target you, but not spells or effects that emanate from you. However, the sensor is treated as a separate, independent sensory organ of yours, and thus it functions normally even if you have been blinded, deafened, or otherwise have suffered sensory impairment. Any creature that has an Intelligence score of 12 or higher can notice the sensor by making a DC 20 Intelligence check. The sensor can be dispelled as if it were an active spell. Lead sheeting or magical protection blocks a scrying spell, and you sense that the spell is so blocked.  spectacular effects, and evocation spells can deal large amounts of damage.  Glamer A glamer spell changes a subject’s sensory qualities, making it look, feel, taste, smell, or sound like something else, or even seem to disappear.  121  Pattern Like a figment, a pattern spell creates an image that others can see, but a pattern also affects the minds of those who see it or are caught in it. All patterns are mind-affecting spells.  is normally capable of speech, the target retains the ability to speak these languages as well. It can write in the languages it understands, but only if the assumed form is capable of writing in some manner—even a primitive manner, such as drawing in the dirt with a paw.  Phantasm  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A phantasm spell creates a mental image that usually only the caster and the subject (or subjects) of the spell can perceive. This impression is totally in the minds of the subjects, not a fake picture or something that they actually sense. It’s a personalized mental impression. Third parties viewing or studying the scene don’t notice the phantasm. All phantasms are mindaffecting spells.  Shadow A shadow spell creates something that is partially real. Such illusions can have real effects. Damage dealt by a shadow illusion is real.  NECROMANCY  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Necromancy spells manipulate the power of death, unlife, and the life force. Spells involving undead creatures make up a large part of this school.  122  TRANSMUTATION Transmutation spells change the properties of some creature, object, or condition.  Polymorph A spell of the polymorph subschool changes the target’s form from one shape to another. Unless otherwise noted in the spell’s description, the target of a polymorph spell takes on all the statistics and special abilities of an average member of the assumed form in place of its own except as follows. • The target retains its own alignment and personality, within the limits of the assumed form’s ability scores. • The target retains its own hit points. • The target is treated has having its normal Hit Dice for purpose of adjudicating effects based on HD, such as the sleep spell, though it uses the assumed form’s base attack bonus, base save bonuses, and all other statistics derived from Hit Dice. • The target retains the ability to understand the languages it understands in its natural form. If the assumed form  In all other ways, the target’s normal game statistics are effectively replaced by those of the assumed form. The target loses all the special abilities it has in its natural form, including its class features, even if the assumed form would normally be able to use these class features. If the assumed form’s size is different from the target’s normal size, its new space must share as much of the natural form’s space as possible, squeezing into the available space (see Squeezing, page 95) if necessary. If insufficient space exists for the assumed form, the spell fails. Any gear worn or carried by the target melds into the assumed form and becomes nonfunctional. When the target reverts to its natural form, any objects previously melded into the assumed form reappear in the same location on its body they previously occupied and are once again functional. Any new items worn in the assumed form fall off and land at the target’s feet. The spellcaster can freely designate the assumed form’s minor physical qualities, such as hair color and skin color, within the normal ranges for a creature of that kind. The assumed form’s significant physical qualities, such as height, weight, and gender, are also under the spellcaster’s control, but they must fall within the norms for the assumed form’s kind. The target of a polymorph spell is effectively camouflaged as a creature of its assumed form, and it gains a +10 bonus on Disguise checks if it uses this ability to create a disguise. If the target of a polymorph spell is slain or rendered unconscious, the spell ends. Any part of the body that is separated from the whole remains polymorphed until the effect ends. Incorporeal creatures or those in gaseous form are immune to polymorph spells, as are creatures of the plant type. A creature of the shapechanger subtype can revert to its natural form as a standard action.  Polymorph Subschool and Preexisting Spells: Any spell based on either alter self or polymorph should be considered to have the polymorph subschool. However, a spell’s existing rules text takes priority over that of the subschool.  DUAL-SCHOOL SPELLS  DESCRIPTOR A descriptor further categorizes a spell. Some spells have more than one descriptor. Most descriptors have no game effect by themselves, but they govern how the spell interacts with other spells, with special abilities, with unusual creatures, with alignment, and so on. The descriptors are listed on the following table.  Acid Air Chaotic Cold Darkness Death Earth Electricity Evil Fear  Fire Force Good Language-dependent1 Lawful Light Mind-affecting2 Sonic Water  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Dual-school spells have effects that encompass two distinct schools of magic. In all cases, treat these spells as if they belonged to both schools. Effects that prevent a spellcaster from accessing one school of a dual-school spell prevent all access to that spell. Specialist wizards can’t learn a dualschool spell if either of the spell’s schools is one of their prohibited schools. Benefits that apply to a school of magic don’t stack with themselves even if the spellcaster can apply them to both schools of magic. For example, if a spellcaster has the Spell Focus feat for either school, it applies to the dual-school spell normally. However, spellcasters who have taken the Spell Focus feat for both of a dual-school spell’s associated schools increase the DC of the dual-school spell by only 1.  Spell Descriptors  1 A language-dependent spell uses intelligible language as a medium for communication. If the target can’t understand or can’t hear what the caster of a languagedependent spell says, the spell fails. 2 A mind-affecting spell works only against creatures that have an Intelligence score of 1 or higher.  LEVEL Spell level is a number between 0 and 9 that defi nes the spell’s relative power. This number is preceded by the name of the class whose members can cast the spell or an abbreviation of that class. The Level line in a spell description also indicates whether a spell is a domain spell and, if so, what its domain and its level as a domain spell are. A spell’s level affects the DC for any save allowed against the effect.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  123  COMPONENTS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A spell’s components define what you must do or possess to cast it. The Components line in a spell description includes abbreviations and words that tell you what components you need. A spell’s description might be more specific about the components required. Usually you don’t worry about components, but when you can’t use a component or when a component is expensive, then the components are important.  VERBAL A verbal component is a spoken incantation. If a spell requires a verbal component, a V appears on the Components line. To provide a verbal component, you must be able to speak in a strong voice. A silence spell or a gag spoils the incantation, and thus the spell. Deafened spellcasters have a 20% chance to spoil any spell they try to cast that has a verbal component.  Illus. by R. Spencer  SOMATIC A somatic component is a measured and precise movement of the hand. An S appears on a spell’s Components line when a somatic component is required. You must have at least one hand free to provide a somatic component.  MATERIAL A material component is one or more physical substances or objects that are annihilated during the casting process. If a spell requires material components, an M appears on the Components line, and details on the specific component or components appear in the spell’s description. Unless a cost is given for a material component, the cost is negligible. Assume you have all components of negligible cost that you need as long as you have your spell component pouch. Unless these materials are elaborate, preparing them is a free action.  FOCUS  124  A focus component is a prop of some sort. An F appears on a spell’s Components line when a focus is required. The actual item required for the focus is detailed in the spell’s description. Unlike a material component, a focus isn’t consumed when the spell is cast. A focus can be reused. As with material components, the cost for a focus is negligible  unless a price is given—assume that focus components of negligible cost are in your spell component pouch. Unless a focus is a large or awkward item, preparing it is a free action.  DIVINE FOCUS A divine focus component is an item of spiritual significance. When a divine focus is required, a DF appears on a spell’s Components line. A divine focus is usually a holy symbol appropriate to the character’s faith. Preparing and using a divine focus is just like preparing and using a normal focus. If the Components line includes F/ DF or M/DF, the arcane version of the spell has a focus component or a material component (the abbreviation before the slash), and the divine version has a divine focus component (the abbreviation after the slash).  EXPERIENCE POINT Some powerful spells entail an experience point cost, and such spells have XP on their Components line. No spell can restore experience points spent in this manner. You can’t spend so many experience points that you lose a level, so you can’t cast the spell unless you have enough experience points to spare. However, you can, on gaining enough experience to attain a new level, use those experience points for casting a spell rather than keeping them and advancing a level. Experience points are treated just like a material component—they are expended when you cast the spell, whether or not the casting succeeds.  CASTING TIME Casting time is the amount of time it takes to perform the act of spellcasting for a particular spell. All required activities for casting the spell are encompassed in its casting time unless otherwise noted in a spell’s description. Casting times are described here in order from shortest to longest. See Action Types, page 7, for more information.  IMMEDIATE ACTION A spell that takes 1 immediate action to cast can be cast at any time, even when it isn’t your turn. Such casting follows all the rules for immediate actions. Casting such a spell doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity.  Feather Fall The addition of immediate actions to the game means that casting feather fall is now an immediate action instead of a free action, since you can cast the spell at any time, even if it’s not your turn. (See Action Types, page 7, for more information.)  SWIFT ACTION  Quickened Spells The addition of swift actions to the game means that casting a spell modified by the Quicken Spell metamagic feat is now a swift action instead of a free action that can be performed only during your turn. (See Action Types, page 7, for more information.)  STANDARD ACTION  LONGER TIMES Casting a spell that has a casting time longer than 1 minute doesn’t usually happen in combat. If it does, every round of casting requires a full-round action, and all the actions required to cast the spell must be consecutive and uninterrupted, or the spell fails.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A spell that takes 1 swift action to cast must be cast on your turn, but the casting doesn’t interfere with your other actions on your turn. Such casting follows all the rules for swift actions. Casting such a spell doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity.  of those 10 rounds, you’re casting a spell as a full-round action. These actions must be consecutive and uninterrupted, or the spell fails.  SPONTANEOUS METAMAGIC SPELLS Spontaneous spellcasters, including those who normally prepare spells but can spontaneously cast particular spells, must take more time to cast a metamagic spell—a spell enhanced by one or more metamagic feats. If a spell’s normal casting time is 1 standard action, casting a metamagic version of the spell is a full-round action for a spontaneous spellcaster. This isn’t the same as a 1-round casting time—the spell takes effect during the same turn that the spellcaster begins casting it. Metamagic spells that have a longer casting time take an extra full-round action to cast spontaneously.  A spell that has a casting time of 1 standard action is cast on your turn, and the spell comes into effect after the standard action is complete.  ROUND  Illus. by W. Reynolds  A spell that takes 1 round to cast is like a full-round action, but unlike most full-round actions, the results don’t happen by the end of your turn. Instead, the spell comes into effect just before the beginning of your turn in the round after the one in which you began casting the spell. You then take your turn normally after the spell comes into effect.  1 MINUTE A spell that takes 1 minute to cast comes into effect just before the beginning of your turn 1 minute (10 rounds) later. For each     I GET A ROUND? I’m sure many D&D groups consider a 1-round casting time to be a full-round action. If you house-rule it that way, it’s okay. The 1-round casting time, if played strictly according to the rules, has drawbacks beyond the hassle of merely tracking it properly. You have to wait for the start of your next turn for the effect, your opponents get extra time to interfere with your casting, and you don’t know if your targets will be in range when the casting is done. For suffering these drawbacks, a druid (the major player in the 1-round-casting game) gets the benefit of  summoning an ally, dropping lightning bolts repeatedly, or bringing down a storm of vengeance. Seems like a good trade. Spells that typically require 1 round casting times are enchantment spells and summoning spells. A fundamental similarity between the summon and enchantment spells is that they create an imbalance in available actions. The summon spells give you more opportunities to act, and the enchantment spells take away your opponents’ actions, sometimes giving them to you. —Logan Bonner, editor     125  on the same turn you cast the spell. To touch an opponent, you must succeed on an attack roll to make a melee touch attack. You can hold the charge and move as defi ned for touching allies.  Touch Attacks  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Touching an opponent with a touch spell is considered to be an armed attack and therefore doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. However, the act of casting a spell does provoke attacks of opportunity. Touch attacks to deliver touch spells follow all normal rules for touch attacks—see Touch Attacks, page 16.  Holding the Charge  RANGE  Illus. by W. Reynolds  A spell’s range is the maximum distance from you at which the spell’s effect can occur, as well as the maximum distance at which you can designate the spell’s point of origin. If any portion of the spell’s area would extend beyond this point, that area is wasted. Standard ranges include the following.  PERSONAL The spell affects only you.  TOUCH You must touch the target to affect it. Some touch spells allow you to touch multiple targets. If you aren’t in combat when you cast a touch spell, you can touch as many willing targets as you can reach as part of the casting.  Touch Spells in Combat  126  Using a touch spell during combat requires some special considerations. Allies and Touch Spells: To use a touch spell on allies during combat, you cast the spell and then touch those you can reach. You can touch one friend as a standard action or up to six friends as a full-round action. If the spell allows you to touch multiple targets as part of the spell, you can’t hold the charge (see below)—you must touch all targets of the spell in the same turn that you finish casting the spell. If the spell allows only one target, you can touch that target during the same turn you cast the spell, or you can hold the charge. You can move before casting the spell, after touching the target, or between casting the spell and touching the target. If you use a full-round action to touch multiple targets, you can take only a 5-foot step. Opponents and Touch Spells: To use a touch spell against an opponent during combat, you cast the spell and then touch that opponent. You can touch the opponent  If you don’t discharge a touch spell during the turn when you cast it, you can hold the charge of the spell indefinitely. You can continue to make touch attacks round after round until you successfully discharge the spell. If you touch anything while holding a charge, even unintentionally, the spell discharges. Intentionally touching anything, even a figment that isn’t really present, discharges the spell as well. You continue holding the charge if something touches you. Unarmed and Natural Attacks with Touch Spells: If you hold the charge of a touch spell, you can make a normal unarmed attack or an attack with a natural weapon at a later time. In this case, you’re considered armed only if your unarmed attack or natural weapon attack doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Otherwise, you provoke attacks of opportunity as normal. If the attack hits, you deal normal damage for your unarmed attack or natural weapon, and the spell discharges. If the attack misses, you’re still holding the charge.  CLOSE The spell reaches as far as 25 feet + 5 feet per two caster levels.  MEDIUM The spell reaches as far as 100 feet + 10 feet per caster level.  LONG The spell reaches as far as 400 feet + 40 feet per caster level.  UNLIMITED The spell reaches anywhere on the same plane of existence.  OTHER RANGES Some spells have no standard range category. Such spells have their range defi ned on the Range line of the spell description.  DURATION A spell’s Duration line tells you how long the spell lasts.  CONCENTRATION  DISMISSIBLE  INSTANTANEOUS The spell energy comes and goes the instant the spell is cast, though the spell’s effects might last longer.  PERMANENT The energy remains as long as the effect does. This means the spell is vulnerable to dispel magic.  SUBJECTS, EFFECTS, AND AREAS If a spell affects creatures directly, its result travels with the subjects for the spell’s duration. If the spell creates an effect, the effect lasts for the duration. The effect might move or remain still. Such an effect can be dispelled prior to when its duration ends. If a spell affects an area, then the spell stays with that area for its duration. Unless otherwise noted in a spell’s description, creatures become subject to the spell when they enter the area and are no longer subject to it when they leave.  TRIGGERED OR DISCHARGED Occasionally a spell lasts for a set duration, or until triggered or discharged. Whichever event happens first determines such a spell’s actual duration.  RAY SPELLS If a ray spell has a duration, it’s the duration of the effect that the ray causes, not the length of time the ray itself persists.  Illus. by J. Pavelec  If the Duration line ends with (D), you can dismiss the spell at will. You must be within range of the spell’s effect and must speak words of dismissal, which are usually a modified form of the spell’s verbal component. If the spell has no verbal component, you can dismiss the effect with a gesture. Dismissing a spell is a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. A spell that depends on concentration is dismissible by its very nature, and dismissing it doesn’t take an action, since all you have to do to end the spell is to stop concentrating on your turn.  Many durations are measured in rounds, minutes, hours, or some other time increment. When that time is up, the spell ends. If a spell’s duration is variable, the duration is rolled secretly, so the caster doesn’t know how long the spell might last.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The spell lasts for as long as you concentrate on it. Concentrating to maintain a spell is a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Anything that could break your concentration when casting a spell can also break your concentration while you’re maintaining one, causing the spell to end. You can’t cast a spell while concentrating on another one. Sometimes a spell lasts for a short time after you cease concentrating.  TIMED  OTHER PARTS Other parts of a spell’s description include its Saving Throw line, Spell Resistance line, and descriptive text. Saving throws and spell resistance are described elsewhere in this book—page 112 and page 130 respectively. The text of a spell description details what the spell does and how it works. If one of the previous entries in the description included “see text,” this is where the explanation is found.     TRACKING DURATION Monitoring spell durations can be a chore. Here are some ways people around Wizards R&D track theirs. Tick Marks or Checkboxes: Low-tech, but easy. Dice: You’ve got plenty sitting around. Make sure you don’t roll your duration die by accident. Counters: When you start up your spell, get out a number of counters or poker chips equal to the duration. Cash one in at the start of your turn.  Initiative Card: If the DM is using cards to track initiative, spell duration can go on your card so it always gets checked when your turn comes up. Initiative Tracker: If the DM uses a board for initiative, your active spells can go right by your name. You can put different spells in different colors to make it easier. Battle Mat: If you’re using a dry-erase or wet-erase battle mat, mark the active spells right on the edge. —Logan Bonner, editor     127  Spell Preparation Many arcane and divine spellcasters have to prepare their spells ahead of time.  ARCANE PREPARATION SPELL PREPARATION  Arcane spellcasters, also known as arcanists, prepare spells in a particular way, following specific rules. A character’s level in an arcane spellcasting class limits the number of spells that character can prepare and cast. Arcane spellcasters can prepare the same spell more than once, but each such preparation counts as one spell toward the daily limit. A high Intelligence score allows an arcanist to prepare a few extra spells. To prepare a spell, an arcanist must have an Intelligence score of at least 10 + the spell’s level.  Illus. by E. Deschamps  REST To prepare daily spells, an arcane spellcaster must first rest for 8 hours. Sleep isn’t required for the whole time, but arcanists must refrain from movement, combat, spellcasting, skill use, conversation, or any other demanding physical or mental task during the rest period. If this rest is interrupted, each interruption adds 1 hour to the total amount of time an arcane spellcaster must rest to clear the mind. Immediately prior to preparing spells, arcane spellcasters must have at least 1 hour of uninterrupted rest. Creatures that don’t need to sleep still require 8 hours of restful calm before preparing any spells.  SPELL SLOTS A class table shows how many spells of each level a spellcaster of that class can cast per day. These openings for daily spells are called spell slots. A spellcaster has the option to fill a higher-level spell slot with a lower-level spell. As they gain levels, spellcasters who lack a high enough ability score to cast higher-level spells still gain access to the  slots associated with those spells. Those slots must be fi lled with lower-level spells.  RECENT CASTING LIMIT If an arcanist has cast spells recently, the drain from doing so reduces the capacity to prepare new spells. When arcane spellcasters prepare spells for the coming day, all the spells they have cast within the last 8 hours count against their daily limit.  PREPARATION ENVIRONMENT To prepare any spell, an arcane spellcaster must have enough peace, quiet, and comfort to allow for proper concentration. The surroundings need not be luxurious, but they must be free from overt distractions. Exposure to inclement weather prevents the necessary concentration, as does any injury or failed saving throw the character might experience while studying. Arcanists also must have access to their spellbooks to study from and sufficient light to read those books by. However, an arcane spellcaster can prepare a read magic spell without a spellbook.  SPELL PREPARATION PROCESS After resting, arcanists must study their spellbooks to prepare any spells that day. It takes 1 hour to prepare the entire daily allotment of spell slots. Preparing some smaller portion of the daily allotment takes a proportionally smaller amount of time, but always at least 15 minutes. This is the minimum time required to achieve the proper mental state for spell preparation. Until arcane spellcasters prepare spells, the only spells they have available to cast are the ones already prepared and not yet used from the previous day. During the study period, arcanists choose which spells to prepare. If an arcane spellcaster wishes, some or all of the spells still prepared from the previous day can be abandoned to make room for preparing new ones.     MAGIC BOUND Most of a wizard’s companions (particularly those impetuous sorcerers) don’t understand that spell preparation is as much art as it is science. Yes, you want to choose spells that will aid in the team’s success, but no one—not even the most accomplished diviner—can be certain of what a new day will bring. And that’s why, despite the sorcerer’s claims that you’re a hidebound, nose-in-the-books bore, you understand that  unpredictability is key. You’re not limited to casting the same roster of spells every day, which means that your enemies never know what to expect from you. With an essentially infinite arsenal of combinations to draw upon, and the understanding that knowledge is power, you can reinvent yourself every day. —Michele Carter, editor     128  METAMAGIC FEATS  PREPARED SPELL RETENTION Once arcanists prepare a spell, it remains in their mind as a nearly cast spell until they use the prescribed components to complete and cast it, or until they abandon it. Other events, such as the effects of magic items or special attacks from monsters, can wipe a prepared spell from a character’s mind, leaving an expended slot behind.  DIVINE PREPARATION Divine spellcasters who prepare their spells do so in largely the same manner that arcane spellcasters do, but with a few differences as described here. The relevant ability for divine spells is Wisdom, so bonus spells are based on Wisdom. To prepare a divine spell, a character must have a Wisdom score of 10 + the spell’s level.  SPELL SLOTS Spell slots work for divine spellcasters just as they do for arcane spellcasters.  As with arcane spells, at the time of preparation, any spells cast within the previous 8 hours count against the number of spells that can be prepared by a divine spellcaster.  PREPARATION ENVIRONMENT A divine spellcaster chooses and prepares spells ahead of time, just as an arcanist does. To prepare any spell, a divine spellcaster must have a peaceful environment that allows for proper concentration, just as an arcane spellcaster does. However, a divine spellcaster doesn’t require a period of rest to do so. Instead, the spellcaster chooses a particular time of day to prepare spells. This time is usually associated with some daily event important to the deity, religion, or creed a divine spellcaster follows. If a divine spellcaster is prevented from preparing spells at the proper time, he must do so as soon as possible. If unable to stop and prepare spells at the first opportunity, a divine spellcaster must wait until the next day to prepare spells.  SPELL PREPARATION PROCESS A divine spellcaster selects and prepares spells ahead of time through prayer and meditation at a particular time of day. The time required to prepare spells is 1 hour, the same as it is for arcane spellcasters. Divine spellcasters don’t have to prepare all their spells at once. However, divine spellcasters are considered fresh of mind only during their initial daily preparation process, so they can’t fill a slot that is empty because they cast or abandoned a previously prepared spell. Divine spellcasters don’t require spellbooks. However, such characters’ spell selection is limited to the spells on the list for their class.  Illus. by M. Cavotta  During preparation, spellcasters who prepare spells choose which spells to prepare augmented by metamagic feats. Thus, the spellcaster chooses which spells take up higherlevel spell slots than normal. A spellcaster can apply multiple metamagic feats to a single spell. Changes to a spell’s level are cumulative. A spellcaster can’t apply the same metamagic feat more than once to a single spell.  RECENT CASTING LIMIT  SPELL PREPARATION  When preparing spells for the day, arcane spellcasters can leave some spell slots open. Later during that day, they can repeat the preparation process as often as they like, time and circumstances permitting, to fill those open slots. They can’t, however, fill any slot that contained a prepared spell after the initial preparation process of the day. This means an arcanist can’t abandon a recently prepared spell to prepare another, nor can that spellcaster refill spell slots of spells that have been cast since the initial preparation process of the day. (Such a spell slot is expended, not open.) Like the initial preparation process of the day, these impromptu preparation processes take 15 minutes or longer.  METAMAGIC FEATS Metamagic feats work for divine spellcasters just as they do for arcane spellcasters, as long as the divine spellcaster can actually take and use the metamagic feat in question.  PREPARED SPELL RETENTION Spells remain in a divine spellcaster’s mind until cast, abandoned, or removed by some effect, just as with arcane spellcasters.  129  SPELL RESISTANCE  Spell Resistance Spell resistance is the extraordinary ability to avoid being affected by some spells and spell-like abilities. A few spells also grant spell resistance. Extraordinary and supernatural abilities, including enhancement bonuses on magic weapons, aren’t subject to spell resistance. A creature can have some abilities that are subject to spell resistance and some that aren’t. Some spells ignore spell resistance (see When Spell Resistance Applies, below). A creature’s spell resistance never interferes with its own spells, items, or abilities. A creature that has spell resistance can’t impart this power to others by touching them or standing in their midst. Only the rarest of creatures and magic items have the ability to bestow spell resistance upon another. Spell resistance doesn’t stack. It overlaps. So, the strongest spell resistance applies while it lasts.  OVERCOMING SPELL RESISTANCE To affect a creature that has spell resistance, a spellcaster must make a caster level check (see page 31) at least equal to the creature’s spell resistance. If the caster fails the check, the spell doesn’t affect the target creature. The creature need not be aware of the threat for its spell resistance to operate. A creature can voluntarily lower its spell resistance. Doing so is a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Once a creature lowers its resistance, that resistance remains down until the creature’s next turn. At the beginning of the creature’s next turn, its spell resistance automatically returns unless it intentionally keeps its spell resistance down by using another standard action.  WHEN SPELL RESISTANCE APPLIES Each spell description includes a line that indicates whether spell resistance applies to the spell. The Spell Resistance line of a spell description might include notations similar to saving throw notations. These include: (harmless): The spell is usually beneficial, not harmful, but a targeted creature’s spell resistance still applies. (object): The spell can be cast on objects, but not necessarily only on objects. Some spells of this sort can be cast on creatures and/or objects. Objects receive spell resistance  only if they’re magical or if a creature that has spell resistance attends (holds, wears, grasps) them. The object uses the higher of its or the attending creature’s spell resistance.  Targeted Spells If a spell that affects one or more targets allows spell resistance, a creature’s spell resistance applies if the spell is targeted at the creature. Some individually targeted spells can be directed at several creatures simultaneously. In such cases, a creature’s spell resistance applies only to the portion of the spell actually targeted at that creature. If several different resistant creatures are subjected to such a spell, the caster checks to overcome each creature’s spell resistance separately.  Area Spells If a spell that affects an area allows spell resistance, a creature’s spell resistance applies if the creature is within the spell’s area. It protects the resistant creature without affecting the spell itself.  Effect Spells Most effect spells summon or create something, and they aren’t subject to spell resistance. Sometimes, however, spell resistance applies to effect spells, usually to those that act upon a creature directly, such as web. Spell resistance can protect a creature from a spell that has already been cast. Check spell resistance when the creature is first affected by the spell. Check spell resistance only once for any particular casting of a spell or use of a spell-like ability. If a creature’s spell resistance fails the first time, it fails each time the creature encounters that same casting of the spell. Likewise, if spell resistance succeeds the first time, it always succeeds. If a creature has voluntarily lowered its spell resistance and is then subjected to a spell, the creature still has a single chance to resist that spell later, when its spell resistance is again functioning. Spell resistance has no effect unless the energy created or released by the spell actually goes to work on the resistant creature’s mind or body. If the spell acts on anything else and the creature is affected as a consequence, no roll is required. Creatures can be harmed by a spell without being directly affected. Spell resistance doesn’t apply if an effect fools the creature’s senses or reveals something about the creature.     EVOLUTION OF SPELL RESISTANCE Back in the old days of the original Advanced Dungeons & Dragons game, monsters had magic resistance, expressed as a percentage chance that a spell cast by an 11th-level wizard would fail against the monster. That chance went up or down by 5% for each level of difference between the caster and 11th level—or it did, if you played strictly by the rules. I’m not sure I ever did. One interesting aspect is that magic resistance was a percentage chance that meant a different thing for different levels of monsters. A low-level monster with 50% magic resistance was immune to the spells of a 1st-level caster, so 50% resistance was really bad for a low-level caster. A high-level monster with 50% magic resistance had no defense against a 21st-level caster, so the same percentage was really good for a high-level caster. The rules of Second Edition simplified magic resistance into a straight percentage chance that the monster could ignore a  spell. So 50% magic resistance negated half of all spells, without regard to the level of the spellcaster. It was just as good for a high-level monster as for a low-level monster. But if a high-level caster faced low-level monsters, his spells might still fail—this system didn’t respect the level of the caster at all. Spell resistance in 3e is a whole lot cleaner, while still having a lot in common with the First Edition system. If a CR 11 monster has SR 22, then a spell cast by an 11th-level wizard has a 50% chance of failing against that monster, because the caster needs to roll an 11 or better on 1d20 to affect the monster. But if the spellcaster is higher or lower level than the monster, that chance of failure goes up or down by 5%. This system respects the caster’s level, like the First Edition system. But it gives you a consistent numerical scale, like the Second Edition system. It’s the best of both worlds. —James Wyatt, designer     130  SPELL RESISTANCE  to spell resistance. Unusual necromancy spells that don’t affect other creatures directly aren’t subject to spell resistance. Transmutation: These spells are subject to spell resistance if they transform the target creature. Transmutation spells aren’t subject to spell resistance if they’re targeted on a point in space instead of on a creature. Some transmutations make objects harmful or more harmful. Even these spells aren’t usually subject to spell resistance, because they affect the objects, not the creatures against which the objects are used.  SUCCESSFUL SPELL RESISTANCE Spell resistance prevents a spell or a spell-like ability from affecting or harming the resistant creature, but it never removes a magical effect from another creature or negates a spell’s effect on another creature. Spell resistance prevents a spell from affecting another spell on the resistant creature, as well as from disrupting a spell the resistant creature is casting. Against an ongoing spell that has already been cast, a failed check against spell resistance allows the resistant creature to ignore any effect the spell might have. The magic continues to affect others normally.  IMMUNITY TO MAGIC A creature that has this characteristic is immune to any spell or spell-like ability that allows spell resistance. Certain spells and effects might function differently against the creature, as noted in its description.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  Magic has to be working for spell resistance to apply. Spells that have instantaneous durations but lasting results aren’t subject to spell resistance unless the resistant creature is exposed to the spell the instant that spell is cast. When in doubt about whether a spell’s effect is direct or indirect, consider the spell’s school. Abjuration: The target creature must be harmed, changed, or restricted in some manner for spell resistance to apply. Perception changes aren’t subject to spell resistance. Abjurations that block or negate attacks aren’t subject to an attacker’s spell resistance. The protected creature is affected by the spell, becoming immune or resistant to the attack. Conjuration: These spells aren’t usually subject to spell resistance unless the spell conjures some form of energy. Spells that summon creatures or produce effects that function like creatures aren’t subject to spell resistance. Divination: These spells don’t affect creatures directly and aren’t subject to spell resistance, even though what they reveal about a creature might be very revealing. Enchantment: Since enchantment spells affect creatures’ minds, they’re typically subject to spell resistance. Evocation: If an evocation spell deals damage to a creature, it has a direct effect (and spell resistance applies). If the spell damages something else, it has an indirect effect (and spell resistance does not apply). Illusion: These spells are almost never subject to spell resistance. Illusions that involve a direct attack are exceptions. Necromancy: Most of these spells alter the target creature’s life force and are subject  131  Spellcasting Whether a spell is arcane or divine, and whether a character prepares spells casts them spontaneously, casting a spell works the same way.  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELLCASTING  WEAPONLIKE SPELLS  132  Developing attributes that support your spellcasting ability is an important aspect of how effective you are as a spellcaster. Such development occurs outside adventures and is most relevant when dealing with spells that function like weapons in certain respects. Any spell that requires an attack roll is weaponlike. Most weaponlike spells also deal some form of damage—lethal damage, nonlethal damage, ability damage, or ability drain. Some bestow negative levels, or they grant conditions or penalties. You can use some combatenhancing feats to improve the effectiveness of weaponlike spells. For the purpose of taking combat-enhancing feats, weaponlike spells fall into two categories— ranged spells and touch spells. Ranged spells include those that require ranged touch attack rolls, such as rays and hurled missile effects. This category also includes spells that generate effects that act as ranged weapons and require ranged attack rolls. Touch spells include any damage-dealing spells that have a range of touch.  ELIGIBLE FEATS The following feats can be chosen to enhance the performance of weaponlike spells in combat. Improved Critical: Choose one category of weaponlike spells (ranged spells or touch spells). When you use a spell of the selected category, its threat range is doubled, so that a spell that normally threatens a critical hit on a roll of 20 has a threat range of 19–20. You can gain this feat a second time, choosing a different category of weaponlike spells. Improved Unarmed Strike: You can add the damage of your unarmed strike to the damage of a touch spell by delivering the spell as a regular melee attack instead of a melee touch attack. The defender gets the full benefit of armor and shield, but if the attack hits, the unarmed strike deals normal damage over and above any damage the spell deals as it’s discharged. If the unarmed strike misses, then the spell isn’t discharged. If the unarmed strike scores a critical hit, damage from the spell isn’t multiplied. Point Blank Shot: You get a +1 bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls with ranged spells that deal hit point damage at ranges of up to 30 feet.  Spells that deal only ability damage, bestow penalties on ability scores, or deal energy drain gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls but no bonus on damage. Precise Shot: You can fire a ranged spell at an opponent engaged in melee without taking the usual –4 penalty on your attack roll. Stunning Fist: When you use your unarmed strike to deliver a touch spell with a successful melee attack, as described in the Improved Unarmed Strike entry, you also stun any target that fails the Fortitude save required by Stunning Fist. Weapon Finesse: You can treat touch spells as light weapons and use your Dexterity modifier instead of your Strength modifier on your touch attack rolls with such spells. Weapon Focus: Choose one category of weapon like spells, ranged spells or touch spells, and gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls made with such spells. You can gain this feat a second time, choosing a different category of weaponlike spells.  STARTING TO CAST First you must choose which spell to cast. If you prepare spells, you select from among spells prepared earlier in the day and not yet cast. If you cast spells spontaneously, you can select any spell you know, provided you’re capable of casting spells of that level or higher and you have an appropriate spell slot available. If a spell has multiple versions, you choose which version to use when you cast it. You don’t have to prepare or know a specific version of the spell.  CONCENTRATION You must concentrate to cast a spell. If you start casting a spell but something interferes with your concentration, you must make a Concentration check. The check’s DC depends on what is threatening your concentration. If you fail, the spell is lost and has no effect. If you prepare spells, the spell you were attempting to cast is lost from preparation as if you had cast it. If you cast spontaneously, the spell you were attempting to cast counts against your daily limit of spells even though you didn’t cast it successfully. Some spells require continued concentration to keep them going. Concentrating to maintain a spell is a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Anything  that could break your concentration when casting a spell can keep you from concentrating to maintain a spell. If your concentration breaks, the spell ends. You can stop concentrating on an active spell as a free action. When you do so, the spell usually ends.  SPELLCASTING  CASTING TIME Most spells have a casting time of 1 standard action. Others take more or less time. You must continue concentration from the turn you start casting until the spell takes effect. If you lose concentration before the casting is complete, you lose the spell.  CASTER LEVEL  COMPONENTS To cast a spell, you must have or be able to perform the components the spell requires. If you can’t provide the components that a spell’s description details, you can’t cast that spell.  SPELL FAILURE If you cast a spell in conditions when the characteristics and limitations of the spell can’t be made to conform, the casting fails and the spell is wasted. Spells also fail if your concentration is broken. They might also fail if you’re an arcane spellcaster wearing armor while casting a spell that has a somatic component.  ATTACKS OF OPPORTUNITY Casting a spell that takes 1 standard action or longer to cast provokes attacks of opportunity. You provoke attacks of opportunity only when you begin casting the spell, even though you might continue casting for longer. If you take damage from an attack of opportunity, you must succeed on a Concentration check (DC 10 + points of damage taken + spell level) or lose the spell. When casting a spell, you don’t threaten any squares around you, so you can’t make attacks of opportunity.  Illus. by W. O’Connor  A spell’s power often depends on its caster level, which is usually equal to your class level in the class you’re using to cast the spell. You can cast a spell at a lower caster level than normal, but the caster level you choose must be high enough for you to cast the spell in question. All level-dependent features must be based on the same caster level. In the event that a magic item or special ability provides an adjustment to your caster level, that adjustment applies not only to effects based on caster level, such as range, duration, and damage dealt, but also to your caster level check to overcome your target’s spell resistance. The adjustment also applies to the caster level used in dispel checks. See Caster Level Checks, page 31.  Casting Defensively Casting a spell defensively doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. It does require a Concentration check (DC 15 + spell level). Failure on the check means that you lose the spell.     IMMATERIAL COMPONENTS Material components for spells have been around since 1st Edition, and for the most part they’re no more relevant now than they were in 1978. Still, in a game renowned for its mechanical elegance and integrated systems, material components remain a harmless injection of flavor that somehow makes the act of casting spells more arcane. It doesn’t quite feel like D&D unless  the party wizard keeps a dollop of bat guano, a glass rod, and a live spider in his belt pouch. Still, I see no reason to keep track of material components that have no actual in-game cost associated with them, and no self-respecting DM should ever deny a wizard his lightning bolt spell because his glass rod broke. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     133  TARGETING When you cast a spell, you must make some choice about whom the spell is to affect or where the effect is to originate, depending on how the spell works. A spell description defines the spell’s target (or targets), its effect, or its area, as appropriate.  TARGET SPELLCASTING  Some spells have a target or targets. You cast these spells on creatures or objects, as defined by the spell. You must have line of sight to or be able to touch the target, and you must specifically choose that target. You don’t have to select your target until you finish casting the spell. You must have line of effect to any target that you cast a spell on.  Illus. by C. Hawkes  Willing Targets Some spells are restricted to willing targets only. Declaring yourself as a willing target is something that can be done at any time, even if you’re flatfooted or it isn’t your turn. Unconscious creatures are considered willing, but a creature that is conscious but immobile or helpless—such as one who is bound, cowering, grappling, paralyzed, pinned, or stunned—isn’t automatically willing.  Targeting Yourself If the target of a spell is you, the spell description has a line that reads Target: You. Against such a spell, you don’t receive a saving throw, and spell resistance doesn’t apply. The Saving Throw and Spell Resistance lines are omitted from such spells.  Creatures as Targets Many spells affect living creatures, which means all creatures other than constructs, deathless, and undead. Other spells affect a specific type of creature, such as humanoid. Creatures in the spell’s area that aren’t of the appropriate type don’t count against the creatures affected.  Redirecting a Spell  134  Some spells allow you to redirect the effect to new targets or areas after you cast the spell. Redirecting a spell requires a move action, and it doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity or require concentration.  EFFECT Some spells create or summon objects or creatures rather than affecting what is already present. You must designate the location where these things are to appear, either by seeing it or defining it. Range determines how far away an effect can appear, but if the effect is mobile it can move regardless of the spell’s range. You must have line of effect (page 80) to any space in which you wish to create an effect.  Ray Some effects are rays. You aim a ray as if using a ranged weapon, though typically you make a ranged touch attack rather than a normal ranged attack. As with a ranged weapon, you can fire into the dark or at an invisible creature, hoping you hit your target. You don’t have to see the creature you’re trying to hit, as you do with a targeted spell. Intervening creatures and obstacles, however, can block your shot or provide cover for the creature you’re aiming at.  Spread Some effects spread out from a point of origin, which must be a grid intersection. The effect can extend around corners and into areas that you can’t see. Figure distance by actual distance traveled, taking into account turns the spell effect takes. When determining distance for spread effects using the battle grid, count around walls, not through them—don’t trace diagonals across corners. You must designate the point of origin for such an effect, but you need not have line of effect to all parts of the spread.  AREA Some spells affect an area. Sometimes a spell description specifies a specially defined area, but usually an area is a burst, an emanation, or a spread. Regardless of the shape of the area, you select the point where the spell originates, but you don’t otherwise control  SPELLCASTING  which creatures or objects the spell affects. The point of origin of a spell is always a grid intersection. You must have line of effect to the point of origin. When determining whether a given creature is within the area of a spell, count out the distance from the point of origin in squares, counting from grid intersection to grid intersection. You can count diagonally across a square, but every second diagonal counts as 2 squares of distance. If the far edge of a square is within a spell’s area, anything within that square is within the spell’s area. If a spell’s area touches only the near edge of a square, however, anything within that square is unaffected by the spell.  Burst A burst spell affects whatever it catches in its area, even including creatures that you can’t see. It can’t affect creatures that have total cover from its point of origin—its effects don’t extend around corners. The default shape for a burst is a sphere, but some burst spells are specifically described as cone-shaped. A burst’s size defines how far from the point of origin the spell’s effect extends.  Emanation An emanation spell functions like a burst spell, except that the magic continues to radiate from the point of origin for the duration of the spell. Most emanations are cones or spheres.  Spread A spread spell spreads out like a burst but can turn corners. You select the point of origin, and the spell spreads out a given distance in all directions. Figure the area the spell affects by taking into account any turns the spell’s magic takes.  of your square, and it extends to the limit of its range or until it strikes a barrier that blocks line of effect. A lineshaped spell affects all creatures in squares that the line passes through. Sphere: A sphere-shaped spell expands from its point of origin to fill a spherical area of a given radius. Spheres might be bursts, emanations, or spreads.  Area Shape Most spells that affect an area have a particular shape, such as a cone, cylinder, line, or sphere. Cone: A cone-shaped spell shoots away from you in a quarter-circle in the direction you designate. It starts from any corner of your square and widens out as it goes. Most cones are either bursts or emanations (see above), and thus won’t go around corners. Cylinder: When casting a cylinder-shaped spell, you select the spell’s point of origin. This point is the center of a horizontal circle, and the spell shoots down from the circle, filling a cylinder. A cylinder-shaped spell ignores any obstructions within its area. Line: A line-shaped spell shoots away from you in a line in the direction you designate. It starts from any corner  Unusual Areas A few unusual area spells have special rules for how the area works. Creatures: A spell with this kind of area affects creatures directly (like a targeted spell), but it affects all creatures in an area of some kind rather than individual creatures you select. The area might be a spherical burst, a cone-shaped burst, or some other shape. Objects: A spell with this kind of area affects objects within an area you select (as Creatures, but affecting objects instead). Other: A spell can have a unique area, as defined in its description.     THE DICE ARE CAST You don’t need to be a math wizard to play a spellcaster. That said, nothing kills the momentum of a round faster than a player who takes 60 seconds to add up 10 six-sided dice. If it takes you more than 10 seconds to add up the damage from your 10d6 fireball, consider taking average damage instead of rolling every time (and don’t forget to write the average damage on your  character sheet next to the spell name). If you really like to roll them bones, use the following trick to speed up play: Separate your rolled dice into batches that add up to 10, then add up those groups of 10 before tacking on the other numbers. I find grouping dice in sums of 10 much easier than keeping a running total in my head. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     135  Shapeable Spells If an Area or Effect entry ends with “(S),” you can shape the spell. A shaped effect or area can have no dimension smaller than 10 feet. Many effects or areas are given as cubes to make it easy to model irregular shapes. Three-dimensional volumes are most often needed to define aerial or underwater effects and areas.  SPELLCASTING  SPELL RESULTS You make all pertinent decisions about a spell (range, target, area, effect, version, and so forth) when the spell comes into effect. Once you know which targets are affected, and whether those targets have made successful saving throws, if any were allowed, apply whatever results a spell entails.  Illus. by M. Cavotta  WEAPONLIKE SPELLS Weaponlike spells that deal some form of damage—lethal damage, nonlethal damage, ability damage, or ability drain—or that bestow negative levels can threaten critical hits, can be used with precision damage (see page 42), and can be used with favored enemy damage bonuses. Since a weaponlike spell isn’t actually a weapon, Strength modifiers on damage rolls and magical effects that increase weapon damage don’t increase damage from a weaponlike spell unless the spell’s description says otherwise. A weaponlike spell that deals lethal damage can’t be used to deal nonlethal damage or vice versa—except when modified by the Non lethal Substitution feat (Complete Arcane 81) or in accordance with the specific regulations of a nonlethal spell duel (Complete Arcane 176).  Attacks Casting time takes precedence over normal rules for attacks, unless a spell’s description says otherwise. If a spell allows its caster to make multiple attacks and has a casting time of 1 standard action, all those attacks occur during that standard action. The caster uses the highest applicable attack bonus for each attack in such a case.  Critical Hits  136  Unless the spell description says otherwise, a weaponlike spell that can threaten a critical hit does so on a natural roll of 20 and deals double damage if the critical hit is confirmed. Only damage that the spell deals in the round it strikes is  doubled by a critical hit—subsequent and continuing damage isn’t. If a successful saving throw decreases the damage, the damage is doubled after that decrease. Extra damage from a critical hit is of the same type the spell deals normally. A critical hit with a spell doubles all forms of damage that spell deals. An energy-draining spell bestows twice that spell’s normal negative levels on a critical hit, while a critical hit with a spell that deals ability damage doubles that ability damage.  Precision Damage Any weaponlike spell that can be used with precision damage, such as sneak attack, follows the normal rules for precision damage with a few alterations. Precision damage applies only in the round when the spell strikes—subsequent and continuing damage isn’t affected. Successful saving throws don’t affect precision damage unless the successful save negates the spell’s damage altogether. A successful precision damage attack with a weaponlike spell deals extra damage of the same type as the spell normally deals unless that spell deals ability damage or ability drain, or it bestows negative levels. Spells that fall into these categories instead deal extra hit point damage in the form of negative energy.  Multiple Hits Some weaponlike spells can strike multiple times in the same round. When the caster receives a bonus on damage rolls or some form of extra damage (such as precision damage) with such spells, the extra damage applies only on the first attack, whether that attack hits or not.  METAMAGIC FEATS In all ways, a metamagic spell (except for one prepared with Heighten Spell) operates at its original spell level, even though it’s prepared and cast as a higher-level spell. Saving throw modifications aren’t changed unless otherwise noted in the feat description. The modifications made by metamagic feats apply only to spells cast directly by the feat user. A spellcaster can’t use a metamagic feat to alter a spell being cast from a wand, scroll, or other device. Metamagic feats that eliminate components of a spell don’t eliminate attacks of opportunity provoked by casting a spell. However, casting a spell modified by Quicken Spell doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity.  COMBINING SPELL EFFECTS Spells or magical effects usually work as described, no matter how many other spells or magical effects happen to be operating in the same area or on the same recipient. Except in special cases, a spell doesn’t affect the way another spell operates. Whenever a spell has a specific effect on other spells, that spell’s description explains that effect. Several other general rules apply when spells or magical effects operate in the same place. Spells that provide bonuses or penalties on attack rolls, damage rolls, saving throws, and other attributes don’t stack with themselves. Two bonuses of the same type don’t stack even if they come from different spells or from effects other than spells. Different Bonus Types: The bonuses or penalties from two different spells stack if the modifiers are of different types. If separate spells apply bonuses that have the same type, only the better bonus applies. A bonus that has no type stacks with any other bonus. Same Effect More than Once in Different Strengths: In cases when two or more identical spells are operating in the same area or on the same target, but at different strengths, only the best one applies. Same Effect with Differing Durations: When the same effect is cast more than once on the same target, the durations of the effects don’t stack. Each effect’s duration elapses normally. Same Effect with Differing Results: The same spell can sometimes produce varying effects if applied to the same recipient more than once. Usually the last spell in the series trumps the others. None of the previous spells are actually removed or dispelled, but their effects become irrelevant while the final spell in the series lasts. One Effect Makes Another Irrelevant: Sometimes, one spell can render a later spell irrelevant. Both spells are still active, but one has rendered the other useless. Multiple Mental Control Effects: Sometimes magical effects that establish mental control render each other irrelevant, such as a spell that removes the subject’s ability to act. Mental controls that don’t remove the recipient’s ability to act usually don’t interfere with each other. If a subject is under the mental control of two or more controllers, that subject obeys each controller to the best of its ability and to the extent that each controller’s effect allows. If the subject receives conflicting orders simultaneously, the competing controllers make opposed Charisma checks to determine which one the subject obeys.  Spells with Opposite Effects Spells with opposite effects apply normally, with all bonuses, penalties, or changes accruing in the order that they apply. Some spells negate or counter each other. This is a special effect that is noted in a spell’s description.  Instantaneous Effects Two or more spells that have instantaneous durations work cumulatively when they affect the same target.  SPELLCASTING CREATURES Sometimes a creature can cast arcane or divine spells just as a member of a spellcasting class can. Such a creature can activate magic items accordingly. It’s subject to the same spellcasting rules that characters are, except as follows. A spellcasting creature that lacks hands or arms can provide any somatic component a spell might require by moving its body. Such a creature still needs material components for its spells. The creature can cast the spell either by touching a required component that isn’t in another creature’s possession or by having the required component on its body. Spellcasting creatures sometimes utilize the Eschew Materials feat to avoid having to use some material components. A spellcasting creature isn’t actually a member of a class and doesn’t gain any class features unless its description says otherwise.  SPELLCASTING  Stacking Effects  AFTER CASTING Once you cast a prepared spell, you can’t cast it again until you prepare it again. If you have prepared multiple copies of a single spell, you can cast each copy once. If you cast spells spontaneously, casting a spell counts against your daily limit of spell slots of that spell level, but you can cast the same spell again if you haven’t reached your limit.  OTHER POWER SOURCES The D&D game includes a wide array of supplements that enable you to incorporate different power sources into your game. Rules Compendium doesn’t include material from all these sources, since you need the supplement the power source appears in to use that power source effectively. Here are some general concepts that apply to these power sources with respect to other effects and abilities in the game. • If an ability provided by the power source functions like a spell, it follows the rules for spells. For example, a psionic power functions like a spell. • If an ability has a type—extraordinary, spell-like, or supernatural—it follows the rules that apply to that type of special ability. For instance, a warlock invocation is considered a spell-like ability. • The stacking rules for effects and bonuses apply, regardless of an effect’s or bonus’s source. • In all cases, any specific rules supplied in the power source’s supplement take precedence over these general rules. Here’s a list of power sources and where you can find more information about them. Breath effects (Dragon Magic); draconic auras (Player’s Handbook II); soulmelds (Magic of Incarnum); infusions (EBERRON Campaign Setting); invocations (Complete Arcane, Dragon Magic); martial powers (Tome of Battle); mysteries (Tome of Magic); psionic powers (Expanded Psionics Handbook); Shadow Weave spells (FORGOTTEN R EALMS Campaign Setting); utterances (Tome of Magic); vestiges (Tome of Magic).  137  Spellcraft If you’re trained in Spellcraft, you can identify spells and magical effects.  SPELLCRAFT (INT; TRAINED ONLY) The DCs for Spellcraft checks relating to various tasks are summarized on the Spellcraft table. Time required and whether you can try a check again are also shown.  SPELLCRAFT  Spellcraft  Illus. by R. Horsley  Task After rolling a save against a spell targeted at you, identify that spell Decipher a written spell Draw diagram to allow dimensional anchor to be cast on a magic circle spell1 Identify materials created or shaped by magic Identify a potion Identify a spell being cast2 Identify a spell in place and in effect3 Learn a spell from a spellbook or scroll4 Prepare a spell from a borrowed spellbook Understand a strange or unique magical effect Using detect magic (3rd round) Determine school in the aura of spell effect Determine school in the aura of nonspell effect Using read magic Identify glyph of warding Identify greater glyph of warding Identify symbol  Time —  Retry DC No 25 + spell level  Full-round action 10 minutes  No  —  No  20 + spell level  1 minute —  No No  —  No  8 hours  No  —  No  Varies  No  25 15 + spell level 20 + spell level 15 + spell level 15 + spell level 30 or higher  —  No  15 + spell level  —  No  15 + 1/2 caster level  —  No  13  —  No  16  —  No  10 + spell level  No  20 + spell level 20  1 This check is made secretly so you don’t know the result. 2 You must be able to hear or see the spell’s verbal or somatic components. 3 You must be able to see or detect the effects of the spell. 4 No retry for that spell until you gain at least 1 rank in Spellcraft (even if you find another source to try to learn the spell from).  138  Spontaneous Casting  SPELL SLOTS The various character class tables show how many spells of each level a character can cast per day. These openings for daily spells are called spell slots. A spontaneous spellcaster always has the option to use a higher-level spell slot to cast a lower-level spell. As they gain levels, spellcasters who lack a high enough ability score to cast higher-level spells still gain access to the slots associated with those spells. Those slots must be used to cast lower-level spells.  REST AND READYING  RECENT CASTING LIMIT Any spells cast within the last 8 hours count against a spontaneous spellcaster’s daily limit of spell slots.  LEARNING NEW SPELLS Spontaneous casters gain spells by attaining levels in their class. They never gain spells any other way. When your spontaneous spellcaster gains a new level, consult the class table that details the number of spells the character knows. Select new spells known to fill your repertoire according to the restrictions for your class. Some spontaneous spellcasters know only a specific list of spells, and know all those spells, while others can choose with more flexibility.  OTHER SPONTANEOUS CASTING Some spellcasters prepare spells, but they can cast certain spells spontaneously as detailed in their class description. A good-aligned cleric or a cleric of a good-aligned deity can spontaneously cast a cure spell in place of a prepared spell of the same level or higher, but not in place of a domain spell. A druid can spontaneously cast a summon nature’s ally spell in place of a prepared spell of the same level or higher. Such spontaneous casting follows special rules for spontaneous spellcasting, such as how metamagic feats interact with casting time, but otherwise functions as normal spellcasting. A multiclass spellcaster can’t cast a spontaneous spell from one class in place of one from another class. Illus. by A. Stokes  Each day, a spontaneous spellcaster must focus his mind on the task of casting his spells. To do so, he needs 8 hours of rest, after which he spends 15 minutes concentrating or performing some other relevant task as defined by the spellcasting class. During this period, he readies his mind to cast his daily allotment of spells. Without such a period of rest and concentration, a spontaneous spellcaster doesn’t regain the spell slots used up the day before. (A particular class might have exceptions to this general rule.)  spells that have a longer casting time take an extra full-round action to cast spontaneously.  SPONTANEOUS CASTING  Some characters can cast spells, but they don’t need spellbooks, nor do they prepare their spells. They can cast any spell they know using a daily allotment of spell slots. These characters are called spontaneous spellcasters. Such a spellcaster’s class level limits the number of spells he can cast. A high ability score might allow such spellcasters to cast a few extra spells, and the class defines the ability score that governs spellcasting. A spellcaster must have a score of at least 10 + a spell’s level in the ability score that governs spellcasting to cast that spell.  SPONTANEOUS METAMAGIC SPELLS Spontaneous spellcasters choose spells as they cast them, and they can choose whether to apply metamagic feats when they cast their spells. As with other spellcasters, the improved spell uses up a higher-level spell slot. Since spontaneous spellcasters don’t prepare metamagic spells in advance, they must apply a metamagic feat on the spot. If a spell’s normal casting time is 1 standard action, casting a metamagic version of the spell is a full-round action for a spontaneous spellcaster. This isn’t the same as a casting time of 1 full round—the spell takes effect during the same turn that the spellcaster begins casting it. Metamagic     GOING SPONTANEOUS I used to play a wizard. The meticulous research! The careful spell selection! The precision spellcasting! (So appealing to an editor.) And then, for a change, I tried out a sorcerer. I never looked back. Sure, it’s great having access to an infinite number of spells, but how many of those do you actually use, anyway? What happens if you’ve prepared the wrong spell selection for the day? Nothing is worse than realizing all you’ve got left is water breathing when you really, really need another fireball.  Spontaneous spellcasters don’t have this problem. So you don’t know the whole roster of toolbox spells that might— possibly—be useful on every specific occasion? That’s what scrolls and wands are for. You don’t need to clutter up your brain with useful but dull spells when more exciting options are available. You’ve got panache—and a f ireball whenever you want it. —Michele Carter, editor     139  Starvation and Thirst Creatures might find themselves without food or water, and STARVATION AND THIRST  with no means to obtain these necessities, resulting in fatigue, damage, and eventually death. A creature that falls unconscious from nonlethal damage due to starvation or thirst begins to take the same amount of lethal damage instead. Damage from starvation and thirst can’t be healed, even magically, until the creature has been treated properly (see below).  STARVATION A Medium creature needs about a pound of food per day. Smaller creatures need half as much per size category smaller, and larger creatures need eight times as much per size category larger. A creature can go without food for 3 days, in growing discomfort. After this time, that creature must succeed on a Constitution check each day (DC 10, +1 for each previous check) or take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. Creatures that have taken nonlethal damage from lack of food become fatigued.  Treating Starvation A creature that has taken nonlethal damage from lack of food must eat before it can heal naturally or magically.  THIRST In normal climates, Medium creatures need at least a gallon of fluids per day. Smaller creatures need half as much per size category smaller, and larger creatures need four times as much per size category larger. In very hot climates, creatures need more water to avoid dehydration. In environments above 90˚ F, creatures need double the normal amount. The amount of water required to avoid dehydration increases by a factor of 1 per temperature band (see page 154) higher than hot—a Small creature needs 1-1/2 gallons in severe heat, 2 in extreme heat, and so on. A creature can go without water for a number of hours equal to 24 + its Constitution score. After this time, the creature must succeed on a Constitution check each hour (DC 10, +1 for each previous check) or take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. In environments above 90˚ F), the time a creature can go without water before making Constitution checks is reduced, as shown on the table below. Creatures that have taken nonlethal damage from lack of water are considered dehydrated and become fatigued. If a dehydrated creature would take nonlethal damage from hot environmental conditions, that damage instead becomes lethal damage.  Dehydration Times  Illus. by S. Belledin  Temperature (Band) 90˚ or lower (warm or cooler) 91˚ to 110˚ (hot) 111˚ to 140˚ (severe heat) 141˚ to 180˚ (extreme heat) 181˚ to 210˚ (unearthly heat) 211˚ or higher (burning heat)  Time before Con Checks 24 + Con hours 12 + Con hours 6 + Con hours 3 + Con hours Con hours 1/2 Con hours  Treating Dehydration A creature that has taken nonlethal damage from lack of water must be treated with long-term care to recover. This treatment requires a DC 15 Heal check and 24 hours of care, along with double the normal amount of water required per day for the heat conditions. If a creature has taken lethal damage from lack of water or from a hot environment, a DC 20 Heal check is required along with 48 hours of care. Once a Heal check of this sort has succeeded, the damage taken by the creature can be restored through the normal means. A heal spell can be used to rehydrate a creature in place of the recovery time, water, and a Heal check.     THIRSTY FOR RULES? In a way, the second book in a series is trickier than the first. It is also true that coordinating multiple designers on the same book is difficult. These truisms were never more apparent than with Sandstorm. We learned a lot of lessons with Frostburn, but apparently not enough. When I received the book for development and editing, I quickly discovered, with aid of co-editors Chris Sims and Cindi Rice, that design had included no fewer than six associated checks or saves that were required for characters traveling through the desert—one each for dehydration, heat, sunstroke, and sunburn. Each check or save (that’s right, some were Constitution checks and some Fortitude saves) was to be  made at varying intervals during desert travel, at anywhere from 1 minute (sixty checks per hour!) to 10 minutes to 1 hour. And these checks didn’t take into account the rules in the Dungeon Master’s Guide on heat dangers, or on starvation and thirst. While we felt the intricacy of these rules was . . . interesting, we thought it would detract from game play, so the rules were greatly scaled back and made to work with those in the Dungeon Master’s Guide. The next time your character is traveling in the desert, think fondly of those editors who made your travel conditions so comfortable. —Chris Thomasson, editor     140  Suffocation If you have no air to breathe, you can hold your breath for 2  Preparing to Hold Breath  A Medium creature can breathe easily for 6 hours in a sealed chamber measuring 10 feet on a side. After that time, the creature takes 1d6 points of nonlethal damage every 15 minutes. Each additional Medium creature or significant fire source (a torch, for example) proportionally reduces the time the air lasts. When a creature falls unconscious from this nonlethal damage, it drops to –1 hit point and is dying. In the next round, it suffocates and dies (–10 hit points). Smaller creatures need half as much air per size category smaller, and larger creatures need four times as much air per size category larger. A larger volume of air lasts for a longer time. So, for instance, if two humans and a gnome are in a sealed chamber measuring 20 feet by 20 feet by 10 feet, and they have a torch, the air lasts for almost 7 hours (6 hours/3.5 people and torches × 4 10-ft. cubes = 6.86 hours).  Illus. by R. Spears  As a move action, you can prepare yourself for a long period of being under water with some careful breathing. On a successful DC 15 Swim check, you can add 4 to the number of rounds you could otherwise hold your breath, provided you start to hold your breath immediately after making the check.  SUFFOCATION  rounds per point of Constitution, but only if you do nothing other than take move actions, free actions, swift actions, and immediate actions. If you take a standard action or a full-round action while holding your breath, the remaining time you can hold your breath is reduced by 1 round. When you can hold your breath no longer, you must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution check to continue holding your breath. The check must be repeated each round, with the DC increasing by 1 for each previous success. When you fail one of these Constitution checks, you begin to suffocate. In the first round, you fall unconscious (0 hit points). In the following round, you drop to –1 hit points and are dying. In the third round, you suffocate and die (–10 hit points).  Slow Suffocation     SUFFOCATING ON REALISM The suffocation rules are one of the places where the D&D rules make a nod toward realism. Most other rules obey a strange sort of heroic physics (see Falling). But the suffocation rule is one of the deadliest in D&D. Nothing based on your level can save you. When the sequence goes failed Constitution check, 0 hp, –1 hp, dead, there isn’t much room for error. This realism can come as a surprise to players, particularly those of high-level characters. Cory Herndon’s thri-kreen ranger,  Klickitat, fell afoul of the suffocation rules during a campaign set in the Dark Sun world. A massive duststorm had engulfed the entire city, but Klickitat ventured out into the sands anyway. Less than a minute later, Klickitat was dying, choking on grit. The ultimately unsuccessful rescue effort nearly claimed the lives of the other PCs. —David Noonan, designer     141  Sunder You can make a melee attack with a slashing or bludgeoning weapon to strike an object that a defender is holding. Rules for attacking objects that are being carried or worn on another creature’s body are covered here, along with those for carried creatures. You can’t sunder armor worn by another creature.  INITIATING A SUNDER ATTEMPT SUNDER  You attack an object held by a defender, using an aimed shot. For doing so, you provoke an attack of opportunity from that defender, provided that creature can make attacks of opportunity.  RESOLVING A SUNDER ATTEMPT  If you beat the defender, roll damage and deal it to the held object. See the tables on page 107 to determine how much damage you must deal to destroy the held object. If you fail the opposed check, you deal no damage.  CARRIED OR WORN OBJECTS When attacking an object that is being carried or worn, make an attack roll against that object’s AC. A carried or worn object’s AC is equal to 10 + its size modifier + the Dex modifier of the carrying or wearing creature. Attacking a carried or worn object provokes an attack of opportunity just as attacking a held object does, but the benefit of the Improved Sunder feat applies.  CARRIED CREATURES A Small or larger creature can carry a Tiny or smaller creature, which then shares the carrier’s space. If the carried creature is visible to an attacker, it can be attacked as if it were a carried object, including the benefit of the Improved Sunder feat. The carried creature uses the higher of its carrier’s or its own Dexterity modifier to determine its AC.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  You and the defender make opposed attack rolls with your respective objects. The wielder of a two-handed weapon receives a +4 bonus on this roll, and the wielder of a light weapon takes a –4 penalty. If the combatants are of different sizes, the larger one receives a +4 bonus on its attack roll per size category larger it is. If the held object is not a weapon, the defender takes a –4 penalty on the attack roll.  SUNDER RESULTS     PREPARING FOR SUNDERING If you DM a character who has the Improved Sunder feat, get into the habit of noting the hardness and hit points of bad guys’ weapons and shields, as well as their unarmed attack values. Doing this will get you used to the rules and reduce page-flipping during play. Also, find ways to challenge sundering without neutralizing it. Monsters that have both good weapon attacks  and natural attacks make for formidable foes, while wizards armed with devastating wands are easy pickings for a sunderer (as long as you don’t mind breaking the wand) and giants can give a sundering PC a taste of her own medicine. Then, for a fun challenge, unleash the hydra! —Stephen Radney-MacFarland, developer     142  Throwing Splash Weapons THROWING SPLASH WEAPONS  A splash weapon is a ranged weapon that breaks on impact, splashing or scattering its contents over its target as well as nearby creatures or objects. Most splash weapons consist of liquids, such as acid or holy water, in breakable vials.  MAKING A THROW To attack with a splash weapon, make a ranged touch attack against the target. Thrown weapons require no weapon proficiency, so you never take a –4 nonproficiency penalty. A hit deals direct hit damage to the target and splash damage to all creatures within 5 feet of that target. You can instead target a specific grid intersection, unless that intersection is part of a Large or larger creature’s space— in that case, you’re aiming at the creature. If you can aim at the chosen grid intersection, make a ranged attack against AC 5. Creatures in all squares adjacent to the grid intersection are dealt the splash damage if you hit. Direct hit damage isn’t dealt to any creature.  MISSING THE TARGET Illus. by W. Reynolds  If you miss the target, roll 1d8 and consult the Missing with a Thrown Weapon diagram. This determines the misdirection of the throw, with 1 being straight back at you (a short throw) and 2 through 8 counting clockwise around the grid intersection or target creature. Then, count a number of squares in the indicated direction equal to the number of range increments of the throw. (The range increment of a thrown weapon is 5 feet.) After you determine where the weapon landed, it deals splash damage to all creatures within 5 feet. Direct hit damage isn’t dealt to any creature.  143  TRACK  Track You can follow the tracks left by creatures across most types of terrain. To find tracks or to follow them for 1 mile requires a successful Survival check. You must make another Survival check every time the tracks become more difficult to follow. You move at half your normal speed. If you fail a Survival check to track, you can retry after 1 hour (outdoors) or 10 minutes (indoors) of searching. Without the Track feat, you can use the Survival skill to find tracks, but you can follow them only if the DC is 10 or lower. You can use the Search skill to find a footprint or similar sign of a creature’s passage using the DCs given on the Ground table, but you can’t use Search to follow tracks.  SURFACE The base DC to track is given on the table below. Other conditions that might affect the DC are listed following the table  Very Soft Ground Any surface that holds deep, clear impressions of footprints. This type of ground includes fresh snow, thick dust, wet mud, and the like.  Soft Ground Any surface soft enough to yield to pressure, but firmer than wet mud or fresh snow, in which a creature leaves frequent but shallow footprints.  Firm Ground Most normal outdoor surfaces are firm ground. Exceptionally soft or dirty indoor surfaces, such as thick rugs or dusty floors, are considered firm ground. Creatures might leave some traces of passage, such as broken branches or tufts of hair, but they leave only occasional or partial footprints.  Hard Ground Any surface that doesn’t hold footprints at all is hard ground. Most streambeds fall into this category, since any footprints left behind are washed away. Creatures leave only faint traces, such as scuff marks or displaced pebbles.  TRACKING BY SCENT A creature that has the Track feat and the scent ability can follow tracks by smell, making a Wisdom check or Survival check to find or follow tracks.  Surface Very soft ground Soft ground Firm ground Hard ground  Survival DC 5 10 15 20  Condition DC Modifier Every three creatures being tracked –1 Every 24 hours since the trail was made +1 Every hour of rain since the trail was made +1 Fresh snow cover since the trail was made +10 Moving at full speed +5 Moving at double speed +20 Poor visibility1: Overcast or moonless night Moonlight Fog or precipitation Tracked party hides trail (moving at half speed)  +6 +3 +3 +5  Size of tracked creature(s)2: Fine Diminutive Tiny Small Medium Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  +8 +4 +2 +1 +0 –1 –2 –4 –8  1 Apply only the largest modifier from this category. 2 For a group of mixed sizes, apply only the modifier for the largest size category.  The typical DC for a fresh trail is 10 (or 20 if a powerful odor is present other than the one you’re trying to track). The DC increases or decreases depending on how strong the quarry’s odor is (DM’s discretion). For each hour that the trail is cold, the DC increases by 2. Creatures tracking by scent ignore surface conditions and poor visibility. Other modifiers apply normally. Flowing water ruins a trail for air-breathing creatures. Water-breathing creatures can use the scent ability to track in the water easily.     TRACKING INFORMATION The Track feat doesn’t cover one of the classic uses of tracking in fiction. That is figuring out what you’re chasing and what the quarry was doing at the spot where you find its tracks. Here’s a house rule for studying tracks for such information. You must have the Track feat to use Survival in this way. Take the DC for finding the tracks, and roll one check to follow them. If your Survival check succeeds, you also receive basic information on what it is you’re tracking, such as size, foot type (boot, hoof, paw), and obvious clues (heavy encumbrance, type of movement, combat). If you exceed the DC by 5, you make out more details, such as creature type, specific kind of creature of the animal type, and subtler clues (whether a creature is fettered  or crippled, a long pause or sudden sprint). If you exceed the DC by 10, you can identify any creature known to you and even subtler clues (the pause in movement was for a debate or a rest, the quarry is watching its back trail). You can also identify any specific kind of creature native to the Material Plane as long as you also have the appropriate Knowledge skill to identify that creature. If you exceed the DC by 15 or more, you can reconstruct exact events and identify any specific kind of creature (even an extraplanar creature) that you have the appropriate Knowledge skill to otherwise identify. The DM is the arbiter of what information you can learn in this way. Tracking by scent might give you similar information, but scent is often less reliable for this sort of detail. —Rich Baker, designer     144  Trip You can try to trip an opponent as an unarmed melee attack. You can trip an opponent only if it is up to one size category larger than you. You can’t trip a burrowing creature, an incorporeal creature, a swimming creature, or a creature that doesn’t rely on limbs for locomotion.  INITIATING A TRIP ATTEMPT To trip a defender, make an unarmed melee touch attack against that creature. This provokes an attack of opportunity from the defender.  stand up again. If you lose, the defender can immediately react to try to trip you. If you’re tripped during a trip attempt you were using a weapon for, you can drop the weapon to avoid being tripped.  Tripping a Flying Defender A winged creature can be tripped, and if it is, it falls as if it didn’t maintain its minimum forward speed. See Fly, page 92.  Tripping a Mounted Defender Some weapons can be used to make trip attacks, as delineated in their descriptions. If a weapon can be used in this manner, you make a melee touch attack with the weapon instead of an unarmed melee touch attack, and you don’t provoke an attack of opportunity. Most creatures make trip attacks normally despite having natural weapons. No creature has an advantage when tripping using its natural weapons unless its description says otherwise.  You can make a trip attack against a mounted defender. The defender can make a Ride check in place of the normal Dexterity check or Strength check. If you succeed, you pull the defender from the mount.  TRIP  Weapons and Natural Weapons  RESOLVING A TRIP ATTEMPT  Illus. by W. Reynolds  If your attack succeeds, make a Strength check opposed by the defender’s Dexterity check or Strength check (whichever ability score has the higher modifier). On this opposed check, a creature receives a +4 bonus for every size category it is larger than Medium or a –4 penalty for every size category it is smaller than Medium. The defender has a +4 bonus if it has more than two legs or is otherwise more stable than a normal humanoid.  Balance If you have 10 or more ranks in Balance, you can make a Balance check in place of a Strength check or Dexterity check to avoid being tripped by an opponent. You take a –10 penalty on your Balance check. If you succeed on this check, you aren’t tripped. When you succeed on a Balance check to resist being tripped, you can’t attempt to trip your opponent.  TRIP RESULTS If you win, you trip the defender, knocking it prone in its space. It must use a move action that provokes attacks of opportunity to  145  Turning  Range  Some creatures can channel positive energy, which can drive off or destroy undead, as well as rebuke, command, or bolster deathless. Others can channel negative energy, which can drive off or destroy deathless, as well as rebuke, command, or bolster undead. Some creatures have the ability to turn creatures of other types.  Turning has a range of 60 feet, but it affects the closest turnable creature first. You don’t need line of sight to a target, but you do need line of effect. You can skip over creatures that have previously been turned but are still within range, so that you don’t waste your turning capacity on them.  Turning Damage  TURNING  HOW TURNING WORKS Turning is a supernatural ability performed as a standard action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. You must present your holy symbol to turn, and turning is considered an attack for the purpose of adjudicating other effects, such as invisibility. You can attempt to turn a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modifier + uses granted by feats or special abilities.  TURNING CHECK You roll a turning check to see how powerful a creature you can turn. This is a Charisma check (1d20 + your Cha modifier). The following table gives you the Hit Dice of the most powerful creature you can affect, relative to your level. On a given turning attempt, you can turn no creature whose Hit Dice total exceeds the result on this table. Turning Check Result 0 or lower 1–3 4–6 7–9 10–12 13–15 16–18 19–21 22 or higher  Most Powerful Creature Affected (Maximum HD)1 Turning level – 4 Turning level – 3 Turning level – 2 Turning level – 1 Turning level Turning level + 1 Turning level + 2 Turning level + 3 Turning level + 4  If your roll on the Turning table is high enough to let you turn some of the targets within range, roll 2d6 + your appropriate class level or Hit Dice (usually cleric level or paladin level –3) + your Cha modifier for turning damage. That’s how many total Hit Dice of creatures you can turn. If your Charisma score is average or low, it’s possible to roll fewer Hit Dice turned than indicated on the Turning table.  TURNING RESULTS Turned creatures flee from you by the best and fastest means available to them. They flee for 10 rounds (1 minute). If they can’t flee, they cower. If you approach within 10 feet of them, however, they overcome being turned and act normally. You can stand within 10 feet without breaking the turning effect—you just can’t approach them. You can attack them with ranged attacks from at least 10 feet away, and others can attack them in any fashion, without breaking the turning effect.  Destroying Creatures If you have twice as many levels or more than the target creatures have Hit Dice, you destroy any that you would normally turn.  Turning Swarms For all purposes related to a turning check or turning damage, treat a swarm as having half its normal Hit Dice.  1 Turning level is your effective level in the class that grants the turning ability, such as cleric level (or paladin level –3).     TURN, TURN, TURN Turning might be the only core rule in 3e that requires you to look up a table. That fits, considering that prior editions had turning tables broken down by the various undead critters in the game. Those tables were part of the fun of playing a cleric. As a DM, I hate turning. It turns some encounters into yawnfests as the undead just turn tail and run. As a player, I love it. There’s nothing like throwing a natural 20 to turn the vampire that’s on the verge of finishing off the party’s fighter. —Mike Mearls, developer  ALTERNATIVE TURNING Turning mimics creatures being frightened by the turner, even though undead are immune to fear. If you dislike turned creatures running away, as Mike does, apply a –4 penalty on turned creatures’ attack rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks for 10 rounds instead. Also, allow the turner to approach the turned creatures without breaking the effect. This mimics James Wyatt’s “Frightened without Fleeing” variant (page 53).  Turned creatures that don’t run also never provoke attacks of opportunity for running. If that bothers you, consider rendering a turned creature stunned (or some equivalent for those immune to stunning) for 1 round. Alternatively, the turned creatures might have to make a Will save (DC 10 + maximum HD affected) to attack the turner at all for those 10 rounds, unless the turner attacks them. However, only those creatures actually attacked by the turner can attack the turner in return. This latter situation simulates turned creatures being held at bay by the turner. They continue to be held at bay until they’re directly attacked, but they don’t have to run away. This can be a more satisfying result, and a cooler scene, than having turned creatures flee. Besides, any DM knows that keeping track of turned creatures as they flee is a pain. Any player knows that turned creatures sometimes return with reinforcements. Both situations are less than ideal for fun. —Chris Sims, editor     146  TURN RESISTANCE Turn resistance is an extraordinary ability that enables some creatures to be less easily affected by turning. When resolving a turning attempt, add the turn resistance bonus to the creature’s Hit Dice.  REBUKING Some creatures can rebuke or command other creatures rather than turning or destroying them. Rebuking requires a turning check as normal for turning, but the results are different.  TURNING  REBUKING RESULTS Creatures that would be turned are rebuked instead, and those that would be destroyed are commanded.  Rebuked A rebuked creature cowers for 10 rounds, as if in awe.  Commanded A commanded creature is under the mental control of the rebuking creature. The controller must take a standard action to give mental orders to a commanded creature. At any one time, the controller can command any number of creatures whose combined Hit Dice don’t exceed his level. The controller can voluntarily relinquish power over any commanded creatures to command new ones. Otherwise, the commanded state is permanent.  DISPELLING TURNING Illus. by R. Guay  If you can rebuke a target, you can use a daily turning attempt to dispel another character’s turning effect on that target. To do so, make a turning check. If your turning check result is equal to or greater than the turning check result that the other character achieved when turning the target or targets, then those targets might no longer be turned. Roll turning damage to see how many Hit Dice worth of targets can be affected in this way.  BOLSTERING If you can rebuke a target, you can bolster such targets against turning by making a turning check. The Hit Dice result on the Turning table becomes the targets’ effective Hit Dice as far as turning is concerned, provided the result is higher than their actual Hit Dice. The bolstering lasts for 10 rounds. If you can rebuke a target of the same type as you, you can bolster yourself in this way.  pqqqqqqqqqrs  REBUKING IS COOL If we ever needed proof that evil is cooler than good, this is it. Good clerics smite undead and destroy them. Evil ones compel them into service. Years ago at a convention game, I played in a scenario that came with premade characters. I had the luck to play an evil half-orc cleric who had an eye on betraying the party. Maybe I had a little too much fun “turning” a mob of undead and commanding them to attack the rest of the party. —Mike Mearls, developer  pqqqqqqqqqrs  147  Two-Weapon Fighting  TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING  If you wield a second weapon in your off hand, you can get one extra attack with that weapon when you make a full attack. Fighting in this way is very difficult, however, and you take a –6 penalty on your attack rolls with your primary hand and a –10 penalty on attack rolls with your off hand. You can reduce these penalties in two ways. • If your off-hand weapon is light, the penalties are reduced by 2 each. An unarmed strike is always considered light, as is an off-hand attack with a double weapon. • The Two-Weapon Fighting feat lessens the primary hand penalty by 2, and the off-hand penalty by 6. The table below summarizes the interaction of all these factors.  RANGED WEAPONS  Illus. by W. Reynolds  The same rules apply when you throw or fire a weapon from each hand, as long as the weapon you’re using doesn’t require two hands to fire. Treat Medium weapons that weigh 1 pound or less as light when used in this manner. Treat Medium weapons that are heavier as one-handed for this purpose. The same light or one-handed designation applies to such weapons when they’re appropriately sized for creatures larger or smaller than Medium.  Two-Weapon Fighting Penalties Circumstances Primary Hand Normal penalties –6 Off-hand weapon is light –4 Two-Weapon Fighting feat –4 Off-hand weapon is light –2 and Two-Weapon Fighting feat  Off Hand –10 –8 –4 –2     MIN-MAX TWO-WEAPON FIGHTING Many methods can maximize the benefits you get from fighting using two weapons. My favorite utilizes sneak attack and fighter bonus feats. By playing a fighter/rogue, you swiftly gain access to Weapon Finesse and Weapon Focus. Using the same light weapon in each hand, or using an exotic weapon with two striking ends, you benefit from both feats, more than making up for the penalty for fighting with two weapons. Sneak attack and Weapon Specialization get you past the lower damage dealt by light weapons. Taking feats such as Improved Two-Weapon Fighting and Greater Two-Weapon Fighting tips the scales even farther in your favor. I like using weapons with wide critical threat ranges  and taking the Improved Critical feat. That way, a larger number of attacks have a much greater possibility of producing a spectacular hit. This advice might seem heavy on min-maxing, but the choices you make about these mechanics can lead to interesting roleplaying concepts. You character might be a dwarf hunter who fights using two throwing axes, keeping several others handy on his belt. Or maybe she’s a fierce human gladiator who wields two punching daggers. Perhaps instead your character is a lightly armored elf fencer who wields two short swords and uses Combat Expertise and Two-Weapon Defense. —Matthew Sernett, designer     148  Underwater Combat Land-based creatures can have considerable difficulty when fighting in water (or any other liquid).  CREATURES WITH NO SWIM SPEED  Riding The resistance underwater imposes a –5 penalty on Ride checks.  Swimming A successful Swim check lets a creature move one-quarter its speed as a move action or half its speed as a full-round action. Failing a swim check means a creature is flailing about, off balance. An off-balance creature is denied its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class, and opponents gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls against it.  Firm Footing Creatures have firm footing when walking along the bottom, braced against a ship’s hull, or the like. A creature can walk along the bottom only if it wears or carries enough gear to weigh itself down—at least 16 pounds for Medium creatures, twice that for each size category larger than Medium, and half that for each size category smaller than Medium.  CREATURES WITH A SWIM SPEED Creatures that have a natural swim speed aren’t subject to the penalties for fighting underwater when grappling or using constrict attacks, piercing attacks (including a bite), rake attacks, ram attacks, rend attacks, tail attacks, or tentacle  ATTACKS FROM LAND Creatures swimming, floating, or treading water on the surface, or wading in water at least chest deep, have improved cover (+8 bonus to AC, +4 bonus on Reflex saves) from opponents on land. Landbound opponents that have freedom of movement effects ignore this cover when making melee attacks against targets in the water. A completely submerged creature has total cover against opponents on land unless those opponents have freedom of movement effects.  RANGED ATTACKS  UNDERWATER COMBAT  Certain penalties apply whenever a creature that doesn’t have a natural swim speed is swimming. These penalties also apply when a creature has firm footing but is largely beneath the surface of a liquid, such as when walking in chest-deep water, or walking along the bottom of a pool. Such a creature takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls and deals half damage, unless it’s using a piercing melee weapon or a natural weapon that strikes as a piercing weapon. The creature also makes grapple checks underwater at a –2 penalty, but deals damage normally when grappling. A freedom of movement effect allows a creature to ignore these penalties.  attacks. Slam attacks that represent full-body rams, such as a porpoise’s slam attack, don’t take the penalties. An elemental of the water subtype can use any of its natural attacks without penalty while underwater. Since a creature that has a natural swim speed doesn’t need to make Swim checks to move around, it’s never considered to be off balance.  Thrown weapons are ineffective underwater, even when launched from land. Attacks with other ranged weapons take a –2 penalty on attack rolls for every 5 feet of water they pass through, in addition to the normal penalties for range.  MAGIC Magical effects are unaffected except for those that require attack rolls, which are treated like any other attacks, and fire effects (see below).  FIRE Nonmagical fire (including alchemist’s fire) doesn’t burn underwater. Spells or spell-like effects that have the fire descriptor are ineffective underwater unless the caster makes a Spellcraft check (DC 20 + spell level). If the check succeeds, the spell creates a bubble of steam instead of its usual fiery effect, but the spell otherwise works as described. A supernatural fire effect is ineffective underwater unless its description says otherwise. The surface of a body of water blocks line of effect for any fire spell. If the caster has made a Spellcraft check to make a fire spell usable underwater, the surface still blocks the spell’s line of effect.     WATER SIMPLIFIED Ever since I read the First Edition module U3 The Final Enemy back in high school, I’ve loved the idea of underwater adventures. The problem is that terrestrial creatures suffer a multitude of drawbacks when underwater—enough to stop many underwater adventures in their tracks. Here are some house rules I use to get around these difficulties while making underwater combat feel different. • All nonpiercing melee weapons and all ranged weapons except crossbows take a –2 penalty on attack rolls. • As a move action, make a Swim check and move up to the check’s result in feet.  • Currents move you at the end of your turn. Moving against a current is at half speed. • Something must be used to indicate a swimmer’s relative depth in the water. Remember, since creatures can swim up and down, it pays to think in three dimensions. And don’t be afraid to throw in magic items that allow the PCs to breathe underwater. They’re essentially power neutral in an aquatic game—that is, they don’t increase the level of power at which the characters operate. —Mike Mearls, developer     149  Weapons Some creatures employ manufactured weapons when they attack. In essence, a manufactured weapon is any weapon that isn’t intrinsic to the creature. Weapons help determine how capable some creatures are in a variety of combat situations.  WEAPON CATEGORIES WEAPONS  Weapons are grouped into several interlocking sets of categories. These categories pertain to what training is needed to become proficient in a weapon’s use (simple, martial, or exotic), the weapon’s usefulness either in close combat (melee) or at a distance (ranged, which includes both thrown and projectile weapons), the ease of wielding it (light, onehanded, or two-handed), and its size (Small, Medium, Large, and so on). Most weapons deal lethal damage, but others deal only nonlethal damage. Improvised is another category.  SIMPLE, MARTIAL, AND EXOTIC  Illus. by S. Prescott  A creature’s type and class determine whether it’s proficient with a category of weapons. A creature that uses a weapon with which it isn’t proficient takes a –4 penalty on attack rolls.  MELEE AND RANGED Melee weapons are used for making melee attacks, though some of them can be thrown as well. Ranged weapons are thrown weapons or projectile weapons that aren’t effective in melee. Some melee weapons can be thrown, bridging these two categories.  Reach Weapons A reach weapon is a melee weapon that allows its wielder to strike at targets that aren’t adjacent. Most reach weapons double the wielder’s natural reach, allowing the wielder to attack at that reach but not within its normal reach. A typical Small or Medium wielder of such a weapon can attack a creature 10 feet away, but not a creature in an adjacent square. A Large wielder wielding a reach weapon of the appropriate size can attack a creature 15 or 20 feet away, but not adjacent creatures or creatures up to 10 feet away. Tiny or smaller creatures gain no advantage from reach weapons.  Double Weapons  150  Some weapons are double weapons, which have two edges or surfaces capable of dealing damage. A creature can fight  using both ends of a double weapon as if using two weapons, incurring all the normal penalties associated with two-weapon fighting while wielding a one-handed weapon and a light weapon. Someone wielding a double weapon in one hand can’t use it as a double weapon—only one end of the weapon can be used in any given round. A wielder can choose to use a double weapon two-handed, attacking with only one end of it.  Thrown Weapons Weapons that are hurled from the hand and require no ammunition are thrown weapons. The Strength modifier on damage rolls applies to thrown weapons except for splash weapons (see page 143). It’s possible to throw a melee weapon that isn’t designed to be thrown (one that doesn’t have a numeric entry in the Range Increment column on the table where its statistics are delineated), but a creature that does so takes a –4 penalty on the attack roll. Throwing a light or onehanded weapon that isn’t designed to be thrown is a standard action, and throwing a two-handed weapon that isn’t designed to be thrown is a full-round action. Regardless of the type of weapon, such an attack scores a threat only on a natural roll of 20 and deals double damage on a critical hit. Such a weapon has a range increment of 10 feet.  Projectile Weapons Projectile weapons are weapons that fire ammunition. Most projectile weapons require two hands to use. The Strength bonus on damage rolls doesn’t apply to projectile weapons unless the weapon is a specially built composite shortbow, specially built composite longbow, or a sling. A Strength penalty on damage rolls applies whenever a creature uses a bow or a sling. Ammunition: Since projectile weapons require ammunition, drawing and loading the ammunition is a factor. Each weapon description delineates the required ammunition, and how that ammunition is prepared or loaded if doing so requires more than a free action. Ammunition that hits its target is destroyed or rendered useless, and nonmagical ammunition that misses has a 50% chance of being destroyed or lost.  LIGHT, ONE-, AND TWO-HANDED  Light A light weapon is easier to use in the off hand than a onehanded weapon is, and it can be used while grappling. A light weapon is used in one hand. The Strength bonus on damage rolls applies when a light weapon is used in the primary hand, but only half of that bonus applies if the weapon is used in the off hand. Using two hands to wield a light weapon gives no advantage on damage.  One-Handed A one-handed weapon can be used in either the primary hand or the off hand. The Strength bonus on damage rolls applies when a one-handed weapon is used in the primary hand, but only half of that bonus applies if the weapon used in the off hand. If a one-handed weapon is wielded with two hands, add 1-1/2 times the Strength bonus on damage rolls.  Two-Handed  WEAPON SIZE A weapon’s size isn’t the same as its size category as an object. Instead, a weapon’s size is the size category of the intended wielder. As objects, light weapons are two size categories smaller than the wielder, one-handed weapons are one size category smaller than the wielder, and two-handed weapons are the same size category as the wielder.  Inappropriately Sized Weapons A creature can’t make optimal use of a weapon that isn’t properly sized. A cumulative –2 penalty applies on attack rolls for each size category of difference between the size of a weapon’s intended wielder and the size of its actual wielder. The measure of how much effort it takes to use a weapon is altered by one step for each size category of  NONLETHAL A few weapons are designed to normally deal nonlethal damage. A creature can use a weapon that deals nonlethal damage, including an unarmed strike, to deal lethal damage instead. Doing so imposes a –4 penalty on the attack roll, because one has to strike only in the most vulnerable areas to deal lethal damage.  Nonlethal Instead of Lethal A creature can use a weapon that deals lethal damage to deal nonlethal damage instead. Doing so imposes a –4 penalty on the attack roll, because one has to use the flat of the blade, strike at nonvital areas, or check the swing.  IMPROVISED Sometimes objects not crafted to be weapons nonetheless see use in combat. Because such objects aren’t designed for this use, any creature that uses one in combat is considered to be nonproficient and takes a –4 penalty on attack rolls made with that object. To determine the size category and appropriate damage for an improvised weapon, compare its relative size and damage potential to actual weapons to find a reasonable match. An improvised weapon scores a critical threat on a natural roll of 20 and deals double damage on a critical hit. Improvised weapons aren’t designed to be thrown, so they take 1 standard action to throw if light or one-handed, and a full-round action to throw if two-handed. An improvised weapon has a range increment of 10 feet.  Illus. by J. Jarvis  Two hands are required to use a two-handed melee weapon effectively. Apply 1-1/2 times the Strength bonus on damage rolls for melee attacks with such a weapon. If you’re allowed to wield a two-handed weapon in one hand, such as when riding and using a lance, that weapon is considered one-handed for the purpose of the Strength bonus on damage rolls while you’re using it in one hand.  difference between the size of a weapon’s intended wielder and the size of its actual wielder. If a weapon’s designation is changed to something other than light, one-handed, or two-handed by this alteration, the actual wielder can’t wield the weapon. A wielder gains no reach from a reach weapon that is too small. No additional reach is granted by a reach weapon that is too big.  WEAPONS  This designation is a measure of how much effort it takes to wield a weapon in combat. It indicates whether a melee weapon, when wielded by a creature of the weapon’s size category, is considered a light weapon, a one-handed weapon, or a two-handed weapon. This category also determines how a Strength bonus is applied on damage rolls. Although the amount of Strength bonus applied on damage rolls can vary with how a melee weapon is used, a Strength penalty on damage rolls applies whenever a creature uses a melee weapon.  151  WEAPON QUALITIES Here is the format for weapon entries on weapon tables.  COST  WEAPONS  This value is the weapon’s cost in coins. The cost includes all miscellaneous gear that goes with the weapon, such as a sheath. This cost is the same for a Small or Medium version of the weapon. A larger version costs twice the noted price per size category larger than Medium. A smaller version costs half the price per two size categories smaller than Medium (round up).  DAMAGE This is the damage dealt by the weapon on a successful hit, given as a dice expression. If two damage ranges are given, then the weapon is a double weapon. Use the second damage figure given for the double weapon’s extra attack. Damage varies by weapon size, though the value for Small weapons is given on most tables. To determine damage for weapons bigger than Medium, use the Increasing Weapon Damage by Size table. For weapons smaller than Small, use the Decreasing Weapon Damage by Size table. A weapon can decrease in size only so far. Weapons that deal less than 1 point of damage have no effect. A weapon that deals 1 point of damage isn’t a weapon if it shrinks further.  Increasing Weapon Damage by Size Medium Damage 1d2 1d3 1d4 1d6 1d8 1d10 1d12 2d4 2d6 2d8 2d10  Number of Size Categories Increased One Two Three Four 1d3 1d4 1d6 1d8 1d4 1d6 1d8 2d6 1d6 1d8 2d6 3d6 1d8 2d6 3d6 4d6 2d6 3d6 4d6 6d6 2d8 3d8 4d8 6d8 3d6 4d6 6d6 8d6 2d6 3d6 4d6 6d6 3d6 4d6 6d6 8d6 3d8 4d8 6d8 8d8 4d8 6d8 8d8 12d8  Decreasing Weapon Damage by Size Medium Damage 1d2 1d3 1d4 1d6 1d8 1d10 1d12 2d4 2d6 2d8 2d10  Number of Size Categories Decreased One Two Three Four 1 — — — 1d2 1 — — 1d3 1d2 1 — 1d4 1d3 1d2 1 1d6 1d4 1d3 1d2 1d8 1d6 1d4 1d3 1d10 1d8 1d6 1d4 1d6 1d4 1d3 1d2 1d10 1d8 1d6 1d4 2d6 1d10 1d8 1d6 2d8 2d6 1d10 1d8  CRITICAL This entry notes how the weapon is used with the rules for critical hits. When a combatant scores a critical hit, roll the damage two, three, or four times, as indicated by its critical multiplier, using all applicable modifiers on each roll, and add all the results together. Extra damage over and above a weapon’s normal damage isn’t multiplied on a critical hit. ×2: The weapon deals double damage on a critical hit. ×3: The weapon deals triple damage on a critical hit. ×3/×4: One head of this double weapon deals triple damage on a critical hit. The other head deals quadruple damage on a critical hit. ×4: The weapon deals quadruple damage on a critical hit. 19–20/×2: The weapon scores a critical threat on a natural roll of 19 or 20 (instead of just 20), and deals double damage on a critical hit. It has a threat range of 19–20. 18–20/×2: The weapon scores a critical threat on a natural roll of 18, 19, or 20 (instead of just 20), and deals double damage on a critical hit. It has a threat range of 18–20.  RANGE INCREMENT Any attack at less than this distance isn’t penalized for range. However, each full range increment imposes a cumulative –2 penalty on the attack roll. A thrown weapon has a maximum range of five range increments. A projectile weapon can shoot up to ten range increments.  WEIGHT This is the weight of a Medium version of the weapon. A larger version weighs twice as much per size category larger than Medium. A smaller version weighs half as much per size category smaller than Medium.  TYPE Weapons are classified according to the type of damage they deal—bludgeoning, piercing, or slashing. If a weapon deals multiple types of damage (bludgeoning and piercing, for instance), all the damage is of the indicated types. A creature has to be immune to all the indicated types of damage to ignore any of the damage from such a weapon. In other cases, a weapon can deal one of two or three types of damage (slashing or piercing, for example). In a situation when the damage type is significant, the wielder can choose which type of damage to deal with such a weapon.     VIVA D12! During the development of the 3rd Edition core rules, I remember seeing dozens of in-house emails talking about weapons and ways to differentiate them mechanically. However, some weapon-related decisions had nothing to do with mechanics and everything to do with aesthetics. Take the greataxe, for  instance: Why does the greataxe deal 1d12 points of damage? The real answer is because the d12 wasn’t getting any in-game use. In early drafts, the greataxe was tagged to deal 2d6 points of damage, but we needed to justify the d12’s existence. In short, our dodecahedrons needed some love. —Christopher Perkins, D&D Design Manager     152  Why Rules Die by Mike Mearls, developer  INTERLUDE: WHY RULES DIE  Removing a rule from D&D is no small task. Most people who play and love the game develop an attachment to all the bits and pieces that make D&D what it is. Each time a rule dies, we risk alienating people who really enjoyed using it. Change for the sake of change is bad, but equally bothersome is the notion that rules are immortal. Our understanding of D&D evolves with every year. Sometimes, a rule has to travel on to rule heaven. But when we kill a rule, we need a clear and compelling reason to do so. The best test to see if a rule needs to die is to try playing the game without it. If no one notices the rule is gone or, even more to the point, if the game plays better without it, it’s time for that rule to hit the road. In the majority of cases, a rule dies because it fails to deliver enough fun for the work required to use it. Rules that try too hard to simulate reality often fall into this trap. First Edition had a table that cross-referenced all the ACs in the game with every weapon in the game. If you punched an opponent wearing leather armor, you gained +2 on your attack. If that foe picked up a shield, it was time to pull out your two-handed sword (+3 against leather and shield) or halberd (+2). In theory, it was interesting and realistic for some weapons to excel against specific armors, but in practice, it slowed the game down dramatically. Rules must also promote fun, and the second leading cause of rule death is prevention of fun for insufficient payoff. Earlier versions of D&D placed limits on classes available to nonhumans and the maximum level they could attain. Human characters gained no special abilities compared to elves and dwarves, and such limits were supposed to balance them. In truth, the rule simply constrained what players could do with the game. The old rules restricted fun and imagination in the game for no clear benefit. At low levels, nonhumans were still stronger. At high levels, the DM either ended the campaign, or multiclassing (which only nonhumans could use) kept nonhumans in the game. Humans in 3e instead have useful abilities to balance the field, and then the designers threw open the class and level gates. Today, people play dwarf paladins and halfling wizards. Nobody bats an eye. Some rules die because they simply fail to meet their stated function. The racial limits on classes fall into this  category, as did the nonweapon proficiencies of earlier versions of the game. Before 3e’s skill system, you either had a nonweapon proficiency and could use it, or you didn’t and couldn’t. Determining if a hobgoblin could sneak past the fighter on watch duty was almost entirely a matter of DM fiat. The nonweapon proficiencies were supposed to act as a skill system, providing means to flesh out PCs’ nonclass features, but they rarely worked out that way. Instead, they were a hodgepodge of random elements shackled together under the same heading. They failed to adequately cover noncombat actions, and away they went. The current skill system, though more limited in the number of options it offers, is more comprehensive. It covers most situations that call for a die roll. Although not the most common, the most pressing case for a rule’s demise occurs when that rule simply breaks the game. Any DM whose players used polymorph to an abusive degree can understand the need to kill a rule that hurts the game as a whole. Polymorph was particularly egregious because it turned the various monster books into giant books of PC resources. A DM or adventure designer had no way to predict which critters a spellcaster might turn into. Even worse, monster designers never considered the effects of many of their creations when they were accessed by means of that spell. In this case, it’s better to fi x the original source of the problem than go back and rewrite every monster in the game to prevent abuse. Finally, sometimes rules die because we find a better way to achieve the same effect. Prior versions of the game required players to subtract the target’s AC from their combat skill, THAC0, to determine the number needed on a d20 to score a hit. Third edition uses the simpler d20 roll plus attack bonus, with the total compared to AC. Subtraction is always a little trickier than addition, and the old system required players to subtract all their bonuses from their combat skill, since a lower skill meant a better chance to hit. In a game with +1 longswords, this was counterintuitive at best. As the game evolves and more rules retire to the great rules graveyard in the sky, there’s a chance that today’s polished, easy-to-use rule becomes tomorrow’s broken, inefficient, complex mess. There was a time when THAC0’s subtraction was a welcome relief from the constant table references required by earlier versions of the game. With each passing year, as we grow our design skills and understanding of the game, you can expect this cycle to continue.     SYSTEM DAMAGE Rules can die spontaneously in individual games. D&D players interpret a troublesome rule as system damage and decide to get along without it. What’s a troublesome rule? It’s something that doesn’t add to long-term fun at the game table. I get paid to understand the D&D rules backward and forward, and I still have my Player’s Handbook open to certain rules when they come up. My players are absolute sharks, so we can run big complicated fights, consulting the text when we must. But a lot of D&D groups simply don’t bother. They’ve made the reasonable decision that some rules aren’t adding to their  fun, and their game has adapted so that it doesn’t use those rules. The aspect of this phenomenon that fascinates me is that it’s often entirely nonverbal. Players never have a “we should stop using this rule” discussion. Instead, they see their game grind to a halt while everyone puzzles out the rule—once. Such players cooperatively make a decision that increases their fun at the table. The more D&D gets its players to cooperatively do beneficial things, the better the experience for everyone. Sure, I wish D&D were nothing but fun, easy-to-use rules, but that isn’t the game we have. So I’ll happily accept groups of players finding ways around stuff they don’t like. —David Noonan, designer     153  Weather If an adventure involves spending a lot of time outdoors, weather can play an important role. Bad weather slows travel and makes it hard to navigate. The table below is appropriate for general use. The DM can use it as the basis for more specific weather tables, since local conditions have a dramatic effect on weather.  WEATHER  SURVIVAL AND WEATHER A creature can predict the weather for the next 24 hours by succeeding on a DC 15 Survival check. For every 5 points by which the check result exceeds 15, that creature can predict the weather 24 hours further into the future. A separate successful DC 15 Survival check grants a +2 bonus on all Fortitude saves against severe weather while moving up to half your overland speed, or a +4 bonus if you remain stationary. You grant the same bonus to one other creature for every point by which your Survival check result exceeds 15.  Weather d% Weather 01–70 Normal 71–80 Abnormal  81–90 Inclement 91–99 Storm 100  Powerful storm  Cold Climate Cold, calm2 Heat wave 4 (01–30)or cold snap5 (31–100) Precipitation (snow) Snowstorm Blizzard  Temperate Climate1 Normal for season3 Heat wave 4 (01–50) or cold snap5 (51–100) Precipitation (normal for season) Thunderstorm, snowstorm Windstorm, blizzard, hurricane, tornado  Desert Hot, calm2 Hot, windy6 Hot, windy6 Duststorm Downpour  1 Temperate includes forest, hills, marshes, mountains, and plains, as well as warm aquatic terrain. 2 Calm means wind speeds are light (0 to 10 mph); see Wind, page 156. 3 Winter is cold, summer is warm, spring and autumn are moderate. Marsh regions are slightly warmer in winter. 4 Raises temperature by 10˚ F. 5 Lowers temperature by 10˚ F. 6 Windy means speeds are moderate to strong (10 to 30 mph); see Wind, page 156.  TEMPERATURE  154  Temperature can be the most important effect of the weather. Prolonged exposure to cold or hot temperatures can quickly wear you down. The following table defi nes temperature bands, which are used to determine the effect of temperature on creatures. In the discussions that follow in this section, protection level refers to how well a creature is protected against the effects of cold or heat—see Protection, page 156, for what these figures mean.  Temperature Bands Temperature –51˚ F or lower –50˚ F to –20˚ F –21˚ F to 0˚ F 1˚ F to 40˚ F 41˚ F to 60˚ F 61˚ F to 90˚ F 91˚ F to 110˚ F 111˚ F to 140˚ F 141˚ F to 180˚ F 181˚ F to 210˚ F 211˚ F or higher  Band Unearthly cold Extreme cold Severe cold Cold Moderate Warm Hot Severe heat Extreme heat Unearthly heat Burning heat  Temperatures outside the moderate and warm bands can deal damage. Those who take any damage from temperature exposure become fatigued, becoming exhausted if they take more damage from exposure (or if they gain the fatigued condition from any other source). A creature rendered unconscious by temperature takes all damage (lethal or nonlethal) in the form of lethal damage. Exposure to heat can also result in dehydration—see Thirst, page 140. Those wearing heavy clothing or any kind of armor take a –4 penalty on saves against heat-related damage. A wet creature takes a –10 penalty on saves against cold-related damage.  UNEARTHLY COLD Unprotected creatures (protection level 1 or lower) take 1d6 points of cold damage and 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per minute (no save). A creature wearing metal armor or coming into contact with very cold metal is affected as if by a chill metal spell, which lasts for as long as the creature remains in the area of unearthly cold. A partially protected creature (protection level 2 or 3) takes damage once every 10 minutes. Protection level 4 or higher offers complete defense against unearthly cold.  EXTREME COLD Unprotected creatures (protection level 1 or lower) take 1d6 points of cold damage per 10 minutes (no save). In addition, an unprotected creature must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage. A creature wearing metal armor or coming into contact with very cold metal is affected as if by a chill metal spell, which lasts for as long as the creature remains in the area of extreme cold. A partially protected creature (protection level 2) takes damage and makes saving throws once per hour. Protection level 3 or higher offers complete defense against extreme cold.  SEVERE COLD Unprotected creatures (protection level 0) must make a Fortitude save every 10 minutes (DC 15, +1 per previous check), taking 1d6 points of nonlethal damage on each failed save. A partially protected creature (protection level 1) need save only once per hour. Protection level 2 or higher offers complete defense against severe cold.  COLD Unprotected creatures (protection level 0) must succeed on a Fortitude save each hour (DC 15, +1 per previous check) or take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. Protection level 1 or higher offers complete defense against cold weather.  MODERATE AND WARM Most creatures are unharmed by temperatures in these bands.  HOT Unprotected creatures (protection level 0) must make successful Fortitude saving throws each hour (DC 15, +1 for each previous check) or take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage.  SEVERE HEAT  Day In many climates, high noon is the hottest time of the day, especially when no barrier against the sun’s blaze exists. In most places, temperatures rise by one band after sunrise, and they can rise another band by high noon. This increase is more pronounced in arid regions, with temperatures rising by three or even four bands between the chill of night and the heat of midday.  WEATHER  Unprotected creatures (protection level 0) must make successful Fortitude saving throws once every 10 minutes (DC 15, +1 for each previous check) or take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage. A partially protected creature (protection level 1) need save only once per hour. Protection level 2 or higher offers complete defense against severe heat.  hills. It increases by one additional band at extremely low elevation (200 feet or more below sea level).  EXTREME HEAT Unprotected creatures (protection level 1 or lower) take 1d6 points of fire damage per 10 minutes (no save). In addition, unprotected creatures must make successful Fortitude saving throws (DC 15, +1 per previous check) every 10 minutes or take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage. A creature wearing metal armor or coming into contact with very hot metal is affected as if by a heat metal spell, which lasts for as long as the creature remains in the area of extreme heat. A partially protected creature (protection level 2) takes damage and makes saving throws once per hour. Protection level 3 or higher offers complete defense against extreme heat.  UNEARTHLY HEAT Illus. by J. Engle  Unprotected creatures (protection level 1 or lower) take 1d6 points of fire damage and 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per round (no save). A creature wearing metal armor or coming into contact with very hot metal is affected as if by a heat metal spell, which lasts for as long as the creature remains in the area of unearthly heat. A partially protected creature (protection level 2 or 3) takes damage once every 10 minutes. Protection level 4 or higher offers complete defense against unearthly heat.  BURNING HEAT Increasing temperatures eventually push past even unearthly heat and graduate to actual burning—when material objects catch fire spontaneously due to the heat. Heat protection is meaningless at this temperature band unless it’s supernatural or comes from a resistance or immunity to fi re. Creatures take 3d10 points of fi re damage per round. Those wearing metal armor or coming into contact with very hot metal are affected as if by a heat metal spell, which lasts for as long as the creature remains in the area of burning heat.  TEMPERATURE VARIATIONS Temperatures can vary significantly, depending on other environmental factors.  Altitude Temperatures drop by one band in low peak or high pass elevations (5,000 feet to 15,000 feet), and two bands in high peak elevations (15,000 feet or more). Temperature increases by one band when descending from low peak or high pass elevations (5,000 feet to 15,000 feet) to  155  Night Temperatures drop one band after the sun goes down. In exceptionally arid areas, temperature might decrease by two or more bands.  WEATHER  Wind In cold regions, strong wind increases the rate at which creatures lose heat, and therefore appears to decrease the temperature. Winds that are strong or greater in strength reduce the effective temperature by one band. Hot wind carries away moisture, raising the risk of heat-related difficulties. Winds that are hot or hotter and strong or more powerful increase the effective temperature by one band.  PROTECTION Bundling up for warmth is the most common means of protection against cold temperatures. Dressing in flowing, light clothing and staying near shade and water are the most common forms of protection against hot temperatures. Those with access to magical protection often rely on that. A level of protection describes a creature’s protection against cold or hot temperatures. To determine a creature’s level of protection, take the base level of protection from either the Protection against Cold or Protection against Heat table, then add any modifiers that apply. Protection against cold temperatures doesn’t confer any resistance to cold energy, and protection against heat doesn’t confer any resistance to fi re. However, equipment that provides a bonus on saving throws against the effects of temperatures contributes that bonus no matter what level of protection it offers.  Resistance to Cold A creature that has resistance to cold applies this resistance to lethal and nonlethal damage from cold temperatures.  Resistance to Fire A creature that has resistance to fire applies this resistance to lethal and nonlethal damage from hot temperatures.  Protection against Cold Base Level of Protection 0 Creature with no cold adaptations 1 Nonarctic animal with fur Monsters native to cold terrain 2 Arctic animal with fur Monsters native to the arctic 3 Endure elements spell Resistance to cold 5 or more Modifiers +1 Cold weather outfit +3 Improvised shelter (snow cave, den)  Protection against Heat  156  Base Level of Protection 0 Creature with no heat adaptations 1 Nondesert cold-blooded animal or vermin 1 Monsters native to hot climates 2 Desert animal or vermin 2 Monsters native to deserts 3 Endure elements spell Resistance to fire 5 or more  Modifiers +1 Desert outfit (6 gp, 3 lb.) +3 Improvised shelter (tent, sand cave, windbreak)  RECOVERING Temperature-related nonlethal damage can’t be healed magically or naturally until a creature gets cooled off (after exposure to heat) or warmed up (after exposure to cold). Once a creature is restored to the proper temperature, it recovers normally from temperature-related nonlethal damage. Only when a creature recovers temperature-related nonlethal damage does a fatigued condition imposed by that damage end. However, a heal spell allows a creature to recover without a change in temperature.  WIND Wind can create a stinging spray of sand or dust, fan a large fire, heel over a small boat, and blow gases or vapors away. If powerful enough, it can knock creatures down, interfere with ranged attacks, or impose penalties on some skill checks. See the Wind Effects table on the following page for a summary—creatures must make Fortitude saving throws to resist effects of wind as show for their size on the table.  LIGHT WIND Light wind has no game effect.  MODERATE WIND Moderate wind has a 50% chance of extinguishing small, unprotected flames, such as candles.  STRONG WIND Strong wind includes gusts that automatically extinguish unprotected flames (candles, torches, and the like). Such gusts impose a –2 penalty on ranged weapon attack rolls and on Listen checks.  SEVERE WIND In addition to automatically extinguishing any unprotected flames, winds of this magnitude cause protected flames (such as those of lanterns) to dance wildly and have a 50% chance of extinguishing these lights. Ranged weapon attack rolls and Listen checks take a –4 penalty. This is the velocity of wind produced by a gust of wind spell.  WINDSTORM Powerful enough to bring down branches if not whole trees, windstorms automatically extinguish unprotected flames and have a 75% chance of blowing out protected flames, such as those of lanterns. Ranged weapon attacks are impossible, and even siege weapons take a –4 penalty on attack rolls. The howling of the wind imposes a –8 penalty on Listen checks.  HURRICANE-FORCE WIND In such raging winds all flames are extinguished. Ranged weapon attacks are impossible (except with siege weapons, which take a –8 penalty on attack rolls). All creatures can hear is the roaring of the wind. Hurricane-force winds often fell trees.  WEATHER  TORNADO All flames are extinguished. All ranged weapon attacks are impossible (even with siege weapons), as are Listen checks. Instead of being blown away, creatures in close proximity to a tornado who fail their Fortitude save are sucked toward the tornado. Those who come in contact with the actual funnel cloud are picked up and whirled around for 1d10 rounds, taking 6d6 points of damage per round, before being violently expelled (falling damage might apply). Although a tornado’s rotational speed can be as great as 300 mph, the funnel itself moves forward at an average of 30 mph (roughly 250 feet per round). A tornado  uproots trees, destroys buildings, and causes other similar forms of major destruction. Tornadoes are very short-lived (1d6×10 minutes).  PRECIPITATION Roll d% to determine whether the precipitation is fog (01–30), rain/snow (31–90), or sleet/hail (91–00). Snow and sleet occur only when the temperature is 30˚ Fahrenheit or lower. Most precipitation lasts for 2d4 hours. Precipitation of any kind can produce ice if followed by a cold snap in which the temperature dips to freezing or below.  Wind Effects Wind Speed 0–10 mph 11–20 mph 21–30 mph  Ranged Attacks (Normal/Siege Weapons1) —/— —/— –2/—  Severe  31–50 mph  –4/—  Windstorm  51–74 mph  No/–4  Hurricane  75–174 mph  No/–8  Tornado  175–300 mph  No/no  Effect on Creatures2 None None Tiny or smaller: Knocked down Small or larger: None Tiny: Blown away Small: Knocked down Medium: Checked Large or larger: None Small or smaller: Blown away Medium: Knocked down Large or Huge: Checked Gargantuan or Colossal: None Medium or smaller: Blown away Large: Knocked down Huge: Checked Gargantuan or Colossal: None Large or smaller: Blown away Huge: Knocked down Gargantuan or Colossal: Checked  Fort Save DC — — 10  Illus. by S. Ellis  Wind Force Light Moderate Strong  15  18  20  30  1 The siege weapon category includes ballista and catapult attacks, as well as boulders tossed by giants. 2 Flying or airborne creatures are treated as one size category smaller than their actual size, so an airborne Gargantuan dragon is treated as Huge for the purpose of adjudicating wind effects. Checked: Creatures are unable to move forward against the force of the wind. Flying creatures are blown back 1d6×5 feet. Knocked Down: Creatures are knocked prone by the force of the wind. Flying creatures are instead blown back 1d6×10 feet. Blown Away: Creatures on the ground are knocked prone and rolled 1d4×10 feet per round, taking 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet. Flying creatures are blown back 2d6×10 feet per round, taking 2d6 points of nonlethal damage due to battering and buffeting.  157  FOG  WEATHER  Fog is a low-lying cloud or a mist rising from the ground, and it isn’t usually accompanied by wind. Thin fog obscures all sight beyond 60 feet, including darkvision. Creatures separated by more than 30 feet of thin fog have concealment with respect to one another. Creatures separated by 60 feet of thin fog have total concealment with respect to one another. Thick fog obscures all sight, including darkvision, beyond 5 feet—creatures 5 feet away have concealment. Those more than 5 feet away have total concealment.  HAIL Hail lasts for only 1d20 minutes but usually accompanies 1d4 hours of rain. Hail doesn’t reduce visibility, but the sound of falling hail imposes a –4 penalty on Listen checks. Sometimes (5% chance) hail can become large enough to deal 1 point of damage per storm to anything in the open.  RAIN Rain reduces visibility ranges by half, resulting in a –4 penalty on Spot and Search checks. It has the same effect on flames, ranged weapon attacks, and Listen checks as severe wind.  Downpour Treat as rain, but a downpour grants creatures 5 or more feet away from each other concealment with respect to each other. A downpour can create floods.  SLEET Illus. by W. Reynolds  Essentially frozen rain, sleet reduces visibility ranges by half, resulting in a –4 penalty on Spot and Search checks. It has  the same effect on flames, ranged weapon attacks, and Listen checks as severe wind, except that its chance to extinguish protected flames is 75%.  SNOW Falling snow reduces visibility ranges by half, resulting in a –4 penalty on Spot and Search checks. It has the same effect on ranged weapon attacks and Listen checks as severe wind. A day of snowfall leaves 1d6 inches of snow on the ground.  Heavy Snow Heavy snow grants creatures 5 or more feet away from each other concealment with respect to each other. Heavy snow has the same effect on flames as moderate wind. A day of heavy snow leaves 1d4 feet of snow on the ground. Heavy snow accompanied by strong or severe winds can result in snowdrifts 1d4×5 feet deep, especially in and around objects big enough to deflect the wind. A heavy snowfall is accompanied by lightning 10% of the time (see Thunderstorm, page 159).  STORMS Storms last for 2d4–1 hours, and wind speeds are severe (30 to 50 mph). The combined effects of precipitation (or dust) and wind that accompany all storms reduce visibility ranges by three quarters, imposing a –8 penalty on Spot, Search, and Listen checks. Storms make ranged weapon attacks impossible, except for those using siege weapons, which take a –4 penalty on attack rolls. Storms extinguish candles, torches, and similar unprotected flames. They cause protected flames, such as those of lanterns, to dance wildly and have a 50% chance to extinguish these lights. See the Wind Effects table, page 157, for possible consequences to creatures caught outside without shelter during such a storm. Storms are divided into the following types.  DUSTSTORM A duststorm blows fine grains of sand that obscure vision, smother unprotected flames, and can even choke protected flames. It leaves behind a deposit of 1d6 inches of fine dust and sand.  SANDSTORM A sandstorm reduces visibility to 1d10×5 feet and imposes a –4 penalty on Listen, Search, and Spot checks. Sand in the storm deals 1d3 points of nonlethal damage per hour to any creatures caught in the open and leaves a thin coating of sand on the ground.  SNOWSTORM In addition to the wind, snowstorms leave 1d6 inches of snow on the ground.  THUNDERSTORM  158  In addition to wind, rain, and sometimes hail, lightning accompanies thunderstorms. One lightning bolt strikes per minute for a 1-hour period. A randomly determined creature caught in the open (or beneath conductive cover, such as a tree) is struck on a result of 20 on the d20. Such a bolt deals 5d8 points of electricity damage, half that on a successful DC 15 Reflex save. A tornado accompanies one in ten thunderstorms.  WEATHER  POWERFUL STORMS  WINDSTORM Although a windstorm is accompanied by little or no precipitation, it can cause considerable damage simply through the force of its wind. Windstorms last for 1d6 hours.  GREATER DUSTSTORM Windstorm-level winds in dusty areas make greater duststorms. These duststorms deal 1d3 points of nonlethal damage  each round to any creature caught out in the open without shelter. They also pose a suffocation hazard, except that a creature wearing a scarf or similar protection across its mouth and nose doesn’t begin to need to make Constitution checks until after a number of rounds equal to 10 × its Constitution score. Greater duststorms leave 2d3–1 feet of fine dust or sand in their wake.  Illus. by M. Tedin  In a powerful storm, wind speeds are over 50 mph, combining with torrential precipitation to reduce visibility to zero, making Spot, Search, and Listen checks, and all ranged weapon attacks impossible. Unprotected flames are extinguished, and protected flames have a 75% chance of being doused. Powerful storms are divided into the following types.  BLIZZARD A blizzard is a combination of high winds and heavy snow. Blizzards last for 1d3 days.  HURRICANE Floods accompany hurricanes, in addition to very high winds and downpours. A hurricane can last for up to a week, but its major impact comes in a 24-to-48-hour period when the center of the storm moves through the area.     CUSTOMIZED WEATHER The rules for weather are designed to model sudden extremes of weather—such as those created with the control weather spell—far better than they model actual meteorology. The reason for this is simple: Better weather rules aren’t worth the trouble. Clear weather tends to enable fun, and bad weather diminishes it. Most DMs have enough to do behind the screen without making daily rolls to see whether it’s overcast or only partly cloudy. If you want to take a step toward a more realistic set of weather rules, I can suggest two techniques. First, modify the  Weather table by region in your campaign world. Second, make the numbers on the table such that the weather on Monday influences the weather on Tuesday. Once you’ve rolled a heat wave, for example, you should modify subsequent rolls on the table to make heat waves more likely. This is tricky to pull off, because you also want to return the weather to some sort of equilibrium periodically. Whether it’s worth the effort is up to you. —David Noonan, designer     159  WRITINGS, MAGICAL  Writings, Magical To record a spell in written form, writers use complex notation that describes the magical forces involved in the spell. Writers use the same system no matter what their native language or culture. However, each writer uses the system in an individualized way. Another person’s magical writing remains incomprehensible until one takes time to study and decipher it. Deciphering a magical writing, such as a spell in another’s spellbook or on a scroll, requires a Spellcraft check (DC 20 + the spell’s level). If the check fails, the decipherer can’t attempt to read that particular spell again until the next day. A read magic spell deciphers a magical writing without a skill check. If the person who created the magical writing is on hand to help the reader, success is also guaranteed. Once a particular magical writing is deciphered, the decipherer doesn’t need to decipher it again. Deciphering a magical writing allows the decipherer to identify the spell and gives some idea of its effects as explained in the spell description. If the magical writing is a scroll, the decipherer can attempt to use the scroll if all other requirements for using that spell completion item are met (see Spell Completion, page 84).  BORROWED SPELLBOOKS Spellcasters who use spellbooks can utilize a borrowed spellbook to prepare a spell they already know and have recorded in their own spellbook, but preparation success isn’t assured. First, the spellcaster must decipher the writing in the borrowed book. Once a spell from another spellcaster’s book is deciphered, the decipherer must make a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell’s level) to prepare the spell. If the check succeeds, the spellcaster can prepare the spell. Another check is required to prepare the spell from the borrowed spellbook again later, no matter how many times it has been prepared before. If the check fails, the spellcaster can’t try to prepare the spell from the same borrowed spellbook again until the next day.  ADDING SPELLS TO A SPELLBOOK Spellcasters who use spellbooks can add new spells to their spellbooks through several methods.  Gained Spells Spellcasters who use spellbooks perform spell research between adventures. Each time such a caster attains a new level in the appropriate arcane spellcasting class, that spellcaster gains spells to add to the spellbook according to the class’s description and any restrictions from specialization. Spells so gained must be of spell levels the caster can cast. Spells gained in this way don’t have the time and money costs for spell’s copied or researched (see Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook and Researched Spells).  160  Copied Spells Spellcasters who use spellbooks can add a spell to their book whenever they fi nd one on a scroll or in another caster’s spellbook. The spell to be copied must be on the copier’s class spell list. No matter what the spell’s source, it must first be deciphered. Next, the decipherer must spend a day studying the spell. At the end of the day, if the decipherer can learn the spell, he makes a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell’s level). If the check succeeds, the spellcaster understands the spell and can copy it into a spellbook (see Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook). The process leaves a spellbook unharmed, but a spell successfully copied from a scroll disappears from that scroll. If the check fails, the spellcaster can’t understand or copy the spell. After such a failure, the decipherer can’t learn or copy that spell again until he gains another rank in Spellcraft. A spell that was being copied from a scroll doesn’t vanish from the scroll in this case. In most cases, wizards charge a fee for the privilege of copying spells from their spellbooks. This fee is usually equal to the spell’s level × 50 gp.  Writing a New Spell into a Spellbook Once a spellcaster understands a new spell, he can record it into his spellbook. The process takes 24 hours, regardless of the spell’s level. A spell takes up one page of the spellbook per spell level. Even a 0-level spell takes one page. Materials for writing the spell cost 100 gp per page. A typical spellbook has 100 pages.  REPLACING AND COPYING SPELLBOOKS The procedure for learning a spell can be used to reconstruct a lost spellbook. A spellcaster who already has a particular spell prepared can write that spell directly into a new book at a cost of 100 gp per page. The process wipes the prepared spell from the mind, just as casting it would. If the caster doesn’t have the spell prepared, it can be prepared from a borrowed spellbook, then written into a new book. Duplicating an existing spellbook uses the same procedure as replacing it, but the task is much easier. The time requirement and cost per page are halved.  SELLING A SPELLBOOK Captured spellbooks can be sold for 50 gp per page of spells—half the cost of writing the book.  RESEARCHED SPELLS A spellcaster of any type can research a spell independently, duplicating an existing spell or creating an entirely new one. Only the creator of such a spell can prepare and cast it, unless he decides to share it with others.


Spell Compendium : INTRODUCTION  Maho-Tsukai (Oriental Adventures): The maho-tsukai’s spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. When adding spells to the maho-tsukai’s spell list, add mainly spells with the evil descriptor. Mortal Hunter (Book of Vile Darkness): The mortal hunters’s spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. Examine the assassin, blackguard, and ranger spells in this book for likely additions to the mortal hunter’s spell list. Prime Underdark Guide (Underdark): The prime Underdark guide’s spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. When adding to the spell list, look for spells that emphasize survival and exploration. Spellthief (Complete Adventurer): The spellthief can learn sorcerer/wizard spells from several speciﬁc schools. Thus, spells in this book from those schools are available to a spellthief to learn. Shaman (Oriental Adventures): Shamans have a spell list that is a blend of druid and cleric, but they should not get all the spells clerics and druids do. Examine the spell lists of both those classes for good choices. Also, consider using the cleric domains presented in this book as shaman domains. Shugenja (Complete Divine): Add spells with strong elemental or weather themes. The druid spell list is a good place to look. Sohei (Oriental Adventures): The sohei spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. If you choose to do so, add spells that deal with personal protection and martial ability. Warmage (Miniatures Handbook): Expanding the warmage spell list isn’t recommended. The warmage has a limited list of spells to balance its power and adding spells might tip that balance. If you’d like to add to the list anyway, try replacing access to spells rather than simply giving the warmage a wider range of spells to choose from. Of course, when a warmage gains the advanced learning class feature, the evocation spells in this book offer many options. Wu Jen (Complete Arcane): Add spells with element (except air), wood, and metal themes.  WHAT YOU NEED TO PLAY  Spell Compendium makes use of the information in the three D&Dcorebooks—Player’sHandbook,DungeonMaster’sGuide,  and Monster Manual. Other books might increase your enjoyment of this product, most notably Complete Arcane and Complete Divine, but they are not strictly necessary.  SWIFT AND IMMEDIATE ACTIONS  Some spells in this book have a casting time of “1 swift action” or “1 immediate action.” These action types, not described in the core rulebooks, are deﬁned and explained below. Swift Action: A swift action consumes a very small amount of time, but represents a larger expenditure of effort and energy than a free action. You can perform one swift action per turn without affecting your ability to perform other actions. In that regard, a swift action is like a free action. However, you can perform only a single swift action per turn, regardless of what other actions you take. You can take a swift action any time you would normally be allowed to take a free action. Casting a quickened spell is a swift action (instead of a free action, as stated in the Quicken Spell feat description in the Player’s Handbook). Casting a spell with a casting time of 1 swift action does not provoke attacks of opportunity. Immediate Action: Much like a swift action, an immediate action consumes a very small amount of time, but represents a larger expenditure of effort and energy than a free action. However, unlike a swift action, an immediate action can be performed at any time—even if it’s not your turn. Casting feather fall is an immediate action (instead of a free action, as stated in the spell description in the Player’s Handbook), since the spell can be cast at any time. Using an immediate action on your turn is the same as using a swift action, and counts as your swift action for that turn. You cannot use another immediate action or a swift action until after your next turn if you have used an immediate action when it is not currently your turn. You also cannot use an immediate action if you are currently ﬂat-footed. Magic Items: Activating a spell completion item, activating a spell trigger item, or drinking a potion is a standard action even if the spell from which the scroll, potion, or item is made can be cast as a swift action. In other words, it takes a standard action to drink a potion of quick march(page 164), even though casting the spell itself requires only a swift action. SOURCES  4  This book includes spells from many sources, including Dragon magazine, web articles previously published on the Wizards of the Coast website, and supplements such as Complete Arcane and Manual of the Planes. Most of the spells are presented with little change, but some material has been revised to v.3.5 based on feedback from thousands of D&D players comparing and debating the strengths and weaknesses of spells at gaming conventions, on message boards, on email lists, and over the counters of their friendly local gaming stores. We hope you like the changes we made to some of these spells. If you have been playing with a spell we’ve picked up and re-  vised for this book, you should strongly consider updating your character or campaign to the new version. The simplest way to do this is simply offer a “mulligan” to any character who needs tweaking. It’s pretty easy to note that a spell has a different duration or that another class can now cast the spell. Most of the changes we made to previously published material we made to create an improved version of that material—to help out spells that were formerly suboptimal choices, to adjust spells that were simply too good, or take whatever steps the D&D 3.5 revision made necessary. Of course, if you’re playing with older material and it’s working fine in your game, you shouldn’t feel compelled to change. It’s your game, after all.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS Illus. by D. Martin  The spells herein are presented in alphabetical order (with the exception of those whose names begin with “greater,” “lesser,” “mass,” “superior,” “swift,” or “ﬁnal”; see Order of Presentation, PH 181). For explanation of spell terminology, see Chapter 10 of the Player’s Handbook.  RENAMED SPELLS  The following spells were renamed before their inclusion in this book. If you look for a particular spell in this chapter and don’t ﬁnd it, check this list to see if the spell has a new name. Previous Name Aganazzar’s scorcher air bubble Alamanther’s return analyze opponent assay resistance Auril’s ﬂowers Azuth’s exalted triad Azuth’s spell shield Balagarn’s iron horn bane bow Barlen’s crabwalk Bigby’s slapping hand  Present Name scorch deep breath replicate casting know opponent assay spell resistance ice ﬂowers triadspell mass spell resistance ironthunder horn foebane crabwalk slapping hand  bridge of sound Caligarde’s claw chamber chameleon claws of the beast climb curse of petty failing curse of petty failing, legion’s Darsson’s potion deafening breath  dark way force claw ethereal chamber camouﬂage claws of the bear climb walls curse of ill fortune mass curse of ill fortune quick potion incorporated into breath weapon admixture Dhulark’s glassstrike glass strike Eilistraee’s grace grace Elminster’s effulgent epuration effulgent epuration Elminster’s evasion instant refuge favor of Ilmater favor of the martyr force ram battering ram force whip sonic whip frost ﬁngers frost breath fugue of Tvash-Prull fugue gate seal seal portal Ghorus Toth’s metal melt metal melt great shout incorporated into greater shout green oath plant body Grimwald’s greymantle greymantle guided arrow guided shot hand of Torm hand of the faithful  5  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  harmony Horizikaul’s boom Horizikaul’s cough Horizikaul’s versatile vibration Igedrazaar’s miasma improved alarm ironguard, greater Kaupaer’s skittish nerves Kelemvor’s grace Khelben’s suspended silence Laeral’s cutting hand Laogzed’s breath Leomund’s hidden lodge manifest, mass Mestil’s acid breath Mestil’s acid sheath minor reﬂection minor servitor monstrous regeneration Mordenkainen’s buzzing bee Mordenkainen’s force missiles Mystra’s miasma Nchaser’s glowing orb Nybor’s gentle reminder Nybor’s mild admonishment Nybor’s stern reproof Nybor’s wrathful castigation  inspirational boost sonic blast sonic snap sonic rumble malevolent miasma greater alarm ironguard nerveskitter life’s grace suspended silence cutting hand nauseating breath hidden lodge mass make manifest acid breath acid sheath ray deﬂection awaken construct greater vigor buzzing bee force missiles magic miasma glowing orb rebuke greater rebuke rebuke, ﬁnal wrathful castigation  Otiluke’s dispelling screen Otiluke’s greater disp. screen Presper’s moonbow Rary’s interplanar telep. bond recall spirit remedy moderate wounds righteous fury  dispelling screen greater dispelling screen moonbow interplanar telepathic bond revenance vigor The version of this spell from the Minatures Handbook has been renamed rhino’s rush rogue wave tidal surge Shelgarn’s persistent blade persistent blade Simbul’s skeletal deliquescence corporeal instability Simbul’s spell sequencer spell matrix Simbul’s spell trigger greater spell matrix Simbul’s spell matrix lesser spell matrix Simbul’s synostodweomer synostodweomer Snilloc’s snowball swarm snowball swarm teleport, mass incorporated into teleport Tenser’s ﬂoating disk, greater greater ﬂoating disk Tirumel’s energy spheres energy spheres Tvash-Prull’s boneﬁddle boneﬁddle undeniable gravity earthbind Vaeraun’s nightshield nightshield Zajimarn’s avalanche obedient avalanche Zajimarn’s ice claw prison ice claw  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS ABSORB WEAPON  Transmutation Level: Assassin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: One touched weapon not in another creature’s possession Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (object); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (object) The weapon you hold in your hand begins to fade from existence as you complete the spell. With the last words of the spell it disappearscompletely.Atthesamemoment, a weapon-shaped red blotch appears on your arm. You can harmlessly absorb a weapon you are touching (even a poisoned one) into your arm, as long as it is not in another creature’s possession. The weapon must be a light weapon for you at the time you cast the spell. The absorbed weapon cannot be felt under the skin and doesn’t restrict your range of motion in any way. An absorbed  6  weapon cannot be detected with even a careful search, although detect magic reveals the presence of a magical aura. The only evidence of its presence is a faint blotch on your skin shaped vaguely like the weapon. When you touch the spot (an action equivalent to drawing a weapon), or when the spell duration expires, the weapon appears in your hand and the spell ends. If you attack with the weapon in the same round that you retrieve it from its hiding place, you can attempt a Bluff check to feint in combat as a free action, and you gain a +4 bonus on the Bluff check. An intelligent magic weapon gets a saving throw against this spell, but other weapons do not.  ABSORPTION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Until expended or 10 minutes/level  Asyoucompletethespell’sintricategestures, you detect a slight buzz at the edge of your hearing. Your body feels warmer, and a feeling of security ﬁlls you. Spells and spell-like effects that target you are absorbed, their energy stored to power spells of your own. Absorption absorbs only ranged spells that have you as a target. Touch spells, effect spells, and area spells that affect you cannot be absorbed. Once the spell is cast, you can absorb 1d4+6 spell levels (rolled secretly by the DM). The level of each spell you absorb is subtracted from the total. If a spell is only partially absorbed (because its level exceeds the number of levels remaining to be absorbed), divide the number of spell levels left unabsorbed by the original spell level. For spells that deal damage, use the result to determine what fraction of the damage you take. For spells that create effects, use the result as a percentage chance to be affected. For example, you have three spell levels of absorption remaining and are struck by dominate person cast as a 5th-  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Evil] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You complete the spell and a hot fog rises from the ground, coiling round you. Stepping out of the billowing steam comes a handfulofsquat,blubberydemons.Other, greater silhouettes loom behind them, answering your call. This spell summons a pack of demons from the Inﬁnite Layers of the Abyss to serve you. When the spell is complete, 2d4 dretches (MM 42) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 babau demons (MM 40) appear. Ten minutes after that, one vrock demon (MM 48) appears. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell. The demons obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else  ACCELERATED MOVEMENT  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) An azure glow surrounds you as you completethemotionsthatunleashthespell.You immediately feel lighter of foot. While this spell is in effect, you can move at your normal speed when using Balance, Climb, Hide, Move Silently, and Tumble without taking any penalty on your check. This spell does not affect the penalty for using these skills while running or charging. Material Component: A dead cockroach.  ACID BREATH  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 15 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes You pop the ﬁre ants into your mouth and exhalequickly.Theantsdistillintodropsof pureacidinmidair,spatteringagainstyour foes and leaving smoking holes. You breathe forth a cone of acidic droplets. The cone deals 1d6 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 10d6). Material Component: A handful of ﬁre ants (alive or dead).  ACID SHEATH  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M, F  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Youcrushtheﬁreantsbetweenyourﬁngers and rub the smashed mixture over your exposed ﬂesh. The smashed ants liquefy, and the liquid covers your body in a thick, translucent sheath. You enclose yourself in a ﬂuid sheath of acid that does not harm you. You can breathe normally and cast spells while the acid sheath is present. Any creature striking you deals normal damage, but at the same time the attacker takes 2 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 30 points). Reach weapons, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in this way. The acid sheath does not protect you against other attack forms, such as ﬁre. If you are in a grapple, other creatures in the grapple takes acid damage once per round at the beginning of their turn. Any spell you cast with the acid descriptor while the sheath surrounds you deals an extra 1 point of damage per die. Material Component: A handful of ﬁre ants (alive or dead). Focus: A glass sculpture of a humanoid (worth 50 gp).  CHAPTER 1  ABYSSAL ARMY  manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the demons. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  level spell. Absorption absorbs three levels of the spell, resulting in a 40% chance (2/5) that you will be affected normally. If affected, any saving throw the spell allows you still applies. Likewise, if you’re struck by disintegrate cast as a 6th-level spell with four levels of absorption remaining, two levels of the spell remain, and you take only 33% (1/3) of the damage you would normally take from the spell. You can use captured spell energy to cast any spell you know or have prepared, but spells so cast don’t disappear from your list of prepared spells or count against the number of spells you can normally cast per day (so you so must keep a running total of spell levels absorbed and used). The levels of spell energy you have stored must be equal to or greater than the level of the spell you want to cast, and you must have at hand (and expend) any material components required for the spell.  ACID STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No Adarkgreencloudwhirlsintobeingbefore unleashing a shower of foul-smelling, yellow-green rain. Acid rain deals 1d6 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to each creature in the area. Material Component: A ﬂask of acid (10 gp).  7  AID, MASS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One or more creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Youholdyourholysymbolaloftandcastthe spell. A silvery radiance dances from your hands, leaping over all the nearby party members and strengthening them. This spell functions like aid (PH 196), except that it affects multiple subjects at a distance and each subject gains temporary hit points equal to 1d8 + caster level (to a maximum of 1d8+15).  Illus. by W. Reynolds  AIMING AT THE TARGET  8  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: S Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Concentration, up to 20 minutes; see text  When you cast this spell, you increase your ability to concentrate on a spell you have already cast. You can cast this spell while maintaining concentration on another spell. Aiming at the target gives you a +10 circumstance bonus on Concentration checks you make to maintain concentration on the other spell, and its effect lasts as long as you concentrate on the other spell (to a maximum of 20 minutes).  AIR BREATHING  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creatures touched Duration: 2 hours/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Tiny bubbles form on your hands as you completethespell.Asyoutoucheachsubject, itschestheavesandshudders,thenbeginsto rhythmically expand and contract.  As you intone the words of power to release this spell, you feel far more focused on the spellonwhich you have been concentrating.  Nebin surprises the trolls with acid breath  The transmuted creatures can breathe air freely. Divide the duration evenly among all the creatures you touch. This spell does not make creatures unable to breathe water. Arcane Material Component: A short reed or piece of straw.  ALARM, GREATER  Abjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Duration: 4 hours/level (D) Uttering a low chant, you ring a crystal bellwiththedrummingofyourﬁngernails, bringing into being an invisible warded area. This spell functions like alarm (PH 197), and in addition the spell works on creatures traveling through the area on coterminous or coexistent planes (DMG 150), such the Ethereal Plane and the Plane of Shadow. Focus: A bell made of carved crystal, worth at least 100 gp.  ALIGN FANG  Align fang makes a creature’s natural weapons good-, evil-, lawful-, or chaotic-aligned, as you choose. A natural weapon that is aligned can overcome the damage reduction of certain creatures, usually outsiders of the opposite alignment. This spell has no effect on a natural weapon that is already treated as being aligned, such as the claw or bite attack of most demons. You can’t cast this spell on a manufactured weapon, such as a sword. When you cast this spell to make a natural weapon good-, evil-, lawful-, or chaotic-aligned, align fang is a good, evil, lawful, or chaotic spell, respectively.  ALIGN FANG, MASS  Transmutation [see text] Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart You hold a sprig of mistletoe aloft and invoke the powers of nature. Your animal allies glow pale blue at their muzzles and paws. This spell functions like align fang, except that it affects multiple allies at a distance.  ALIGN WEAPON, MASS  Transmutation [see text] Level: Cleric 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One weapon/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  ALLEGRO  Transmutation Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) With a quick wiggle of your ﬁngers and a fewarcanewords,youreleasethefeatherin your hand to complete the spell. Suddenly, translucentbluemotesburstoutwardfrom youandcollectonyourselfandyournearby allies before fading away. Each creature within the spell’s area gains a 30-foot enhancement bonus to its land speed, up to a maximum of double the creature’s land speed. Affected creatures retain these effects for the duration of the spell, even if they leave the original area. Material Component: A tail feather from a bird of prey.  AMANUENSIS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 0, sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Object or objects with writing Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You point at the writing and then move your hand as though holding a stylus or quill. As you intone the spell, the script appears on a sheet of paper close at hand. You cause writing from one source (such as a book) to be copied into a book, paper, or parchment. This spell copies 250 words per minute and cre-  CHAPTER 1  You kneel beside your animal companion andpressasprigofmistletoeagainstitsforehead, calling upon the power of nature.  This spell functions like align weapon (PH 197), except that it affects multiple weapons or projectiles at a distance.  ates a perfect duplicate of the original. The spell copies only nonmagical text, not illustrations or magical writings (such as the text of a spellbook, a spell scroll, or a sepia snake sigil). If the target contains normal and magical writing (such as a letter with explosive runes), only the normal text is copied, leaving blank space in the copied text where the magical writing would be expected. Likewise, if the target contains text and illustration, only the text is copied. The spell triggers (but does not copy) writing-based magic traps in the material being copied. Blank paper, parchment, or a book must be provided for the spell to write upon. If the target has multiple pages, the spell automatically turns to the next blank page whenever necessary. If more pages in the target exist than blank pages are available, the spell copies the original until it runs out of blank pages. At any time during the spell’s duration you can redirect the magic to copy from another target, copy onto a different blank source, or resume a duplication that was interrupted by a shortfall of blank pages. The spell does not translate the copied writing. If you do not understand the original, you have no additional ability to understand the copy.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation [see text] Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You hold your holy symbol high and speak old words of power. Your party’s weapons take on a pale blue radiance.  AMORPHOUS FORM  Transmutation Level: Assassin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing corporeal creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You dust your ally with gelatin and silently evokethespell.Immediatelyherbonesbegin tosoftenandsheandherbelongingsslump, becoming malleable ooze. The subject and all its gear become amorphous and oozelike. This new form is boneless and ﬂuid, enabling the subject to pass through holes or narrow openings as small as 2 inches in diameter. While amorphous, the subject is immune to poison, polymorphing, and stunning, it cannot be ﬂanked, and it is  9  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  not subject to extra damage from critical hits. It gains a swim speed (if it does not have one already) equal to its land speed. The subject can remain submerged as long as desired without breathing. The subject’s armor (including natural armor) becomes worthless, though its modiﬁers for size, Dexterity, and deﬂection still apply to Armor Class, as do armor bonuses from force effects (for example, from the mage armor spell). While amorphous, the subject can’t attack or cast spells that require verbal, somatic, material, or focus components. (This limitation does not rule out the casting of any spells that the subject might have prepared using the metamagic feats Eschew Materials, Silent Spell, and Still Spell.) The subject loses all supernatural abilities while in amorphous form, and its magic items, aside from those bonuses noted above, cease functioning as long as it remains amorphous. Material Component: A pinch of gelatin.  You need to hear what’s going on. A hand motionortwo,andthevoicesbecomelouder to your ears. You cause an ampliﬁcation of all sounds within the spell’s area. This decreases the DC to hear those sounds by 20. Those creatures within the spell’s area do not notice the increased ampliﬁcation. Thus, anyone whose voice is ampliﬁed remains unaware of the increase in volume. The spell can be centered on a creature, and the effect then radiates from the creature and moves as it moves.  You can tell whether an area contains a magical portal or the effect of a gate spell. If you study an area for 1 round, you know the sizes and locations of any such portals in the area. Once you ﬁnd a portal, you can study it. (If you ﬁnd more than one portal, you can study only one at a time.) Each round you study a portal, you can discover one property of the portal, in this order. • Any key or command word needed to activate the portal. • Any special circumstances governing the portal’s use (such as speciﬁc times when it can be activated). • Whether the portal is one-way or two-way. • A glimpse of the area where the portal leads. You can look at the area where the portal leads for 1 round; the range of your vision is the spell’s range. Analyze portal does not allow other divination spells or spell-like abilities to extend through the portal. For example, you cannot also use detect magic or detect evil to study the area where the portal leads while viewing the area with analyze portal.  AMPLIFY  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or point in space Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes; see text  10  An unwilling creature can attempt a Will save to negate the spell and can apply spell resistance, if any. Items in a creature’s possession receive the beneﬁts of saves and spell resistance, but unattended objects and points in space do not. Amplify counters and dispels silence, and is also countered and dispelled by silence.  Gaining the beneﬁts of the amorphous body spell can be disconcerting  ANALYZE PORTAL  Divination Level: Bard 3, Portal 2, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation from you to the extreme of the range Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No Seeing with a magic eye, you sense the portal. Studying it, knowledge about the portal comes into your mind as though it was a memory you could not recall until now.  For each property, you make a caster level check (1d20 + caster level) against DC 17. If fail, you can try again in the next round. Analyze portal has only a limited ability to reveal unusual properties, as follows. • Random Portals: The spell reveals only that the portal is random and whether it can be activated now. It does not reveal when the portal starts or stops functioning. • Variable Portals: The spell reveals only that the portal is variable. If you study the portal’s destination, the spell reveals only the destination to which the portal is currently set. • Creature-Only Portals: The spell reveals this property. If you study the portal’s destination, the spell reveals where the portal sends creatures. If it is the kind of portal that sends creatures to one place and their equipment to another place, the spell does not reveal where the equipment goes.  • Malfunctioning Portals: The spell reveals only that the portal is malfunctioning, not what sort of malfunction the portal produces. Material Components: A crystal lens and a small mirror.  ANARCHIC STORM  The downpour created by this spell falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages lawful creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (lawful outsiders take double damage). In addition, each round, a bolt of lightning strikes a randomly selected lawful outsider within the spell’s area, dealing 5d6 points of electricity damage. After the spell’s duration expires, the water disappears. Material Component: A ﬂask of anarchic water (see the anarchic water spell, below).  ANARCHIC WATER  Transmutation [Chaotic] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Flask of water touched Duration: Instantaneous  This transmutation imbues a ﬂask (1 pint) of water with the energy of chaos, turning it into anarchic water. Anarchic water damages lawful outsiders the way holy water damages undead and evil outsiders. A ﬂask of anarchic water can be thrown as a splash weapon. Treat this attack as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 10 feet. A ﬂask breaks if thrown against the body of a corporeal creature, but to use it against an incorporeal creature, the bearer must open the ﬂask and pour the anarchic water out onto the target. Thus, a character can douse an incorporeal creature with anarchic water only if he is adjacent to it. Doing so is a ranged touch attack that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. A direct hit by a ﬂask of anarchic water deals 2d4 points of damage to a lawful outsider. Each such creature within 5 feet of the point where the ﬂask hits takes 1 point of damage from the splash. MaterialComponent: 5pounds ofpowdered iron and silver (worth 25 gp).  ANGELSKIN  Abjuration [Good] Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Lawful good creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your ally with the holy symbol andinvoketheblessedwords.Anopalescent glow spreads across her skin, imbuing it with a pearl-like sheen. The subject gains damage reduction 5/evil.  Evocation [Light] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 feet Area: All sighted creatures within a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Your body explodes with radiance that bathes the area around you in sunlight.  CHAPTER 1  You call upon the powers of chaos, and a heavy rain begins to fall around you, its drops a rainbow of soft radiances. Above you, a multicolored lightning bolt ﬂashes.  You speak the ancient, slippery words as you pour the iron and silver into the ﬂask. Despite the fact that there is more powder than room in the bottle, all of it dissolves, leaving a ﬂask of water swirling with motes of gold.  ANGER OF THE NOONDAY SUN  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Conjuration (Creation) [Chaotic, Water] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  Any creature within the area of the spell that can see you must make a saving throw or be temporarily blinded. The blindness lasts for 1 minute per caster level. An undead creature caught within the spell’s area takes 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6), or half damage if a Reﬂex save is successful. In addition, the beam results in the destruction of any undead creature speciﬁcally harmed by bright light (such as a vampire) if it fails its save. The ultraviolet light generated by the spell deals damage to fungi, mold, oozes, and slimes as if they were undead creatures.  ANIMATE BREATH  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round/level You exhale a ﬂaming tongue of ﬁre, but instead of lashing out against your foes, it produces a creature made of ﬂames that answers to your bidding. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you imbue the energy of your breath weapon with coherence, mobility, and a semblance of life. The  11  Illus. by F. Hooper  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Animate breath gives a lone dragon a powerful ally  animated breath then attacks whomever or whatever you designate. The spell works only on breath weapons that deal energy (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic) damage. The animated breath uses the statistics of a Huge ﬁre elemental (MM 99), with the following exceptions. • The creature’s subtype changes to match the energy damage dealt by the breath weapon. • The creature deals 2d8 points of damage of the same type as the breath weapon with each successful slam attack, instead of 2d8 points of ﬁre. • The creature has immunity to its own energy type, but no vulnerability to another energy type. • The creature does not have the burn ability.  12  ANIMATE FIRE  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One Small ﬁre Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By casting the mixture in your hand at the ﬁre, you complete the spell. Immediately thereafter, a part of the ﬂame coalesces into a vaguely humanoid shape more solid looking than the rest. You animate a ﬁre, which must be approximately the size of a campﬁre. The animated ﬁre has the statistics of a Small ﬁre elemental (MM 98), and attacks as you direct. It cannot move beyond the range of its source ﬁre (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels).  Material Component: A handful of charcoal, sulfur, and soda ash.  ANIMATE SNOW  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: Cube of snow up to 20 ft. on a side Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Nearby snow rapidly draws together with anaudiblecrunch,coalescingintoavaguely human-shaped form. You cause snow in the area to become 1d3+2 Large animated objects, 1d3 Huge animated objects, or one Gargantuan animated object (MM 14). The animated snow attacks as directed by your vocal commands.  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 1 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Cube of water up to 5 ft. on a side You indicate a patch of water with a hand shaking from pent-up divine spell power, and the liquid rises into a vaguely humanoid shape. This spell functions like animate ﬁre, but you can instead animate a quantity of water of at least 4 cubic feet into a Small water elemental (MM 100). Material Component: A vial of pure spring water mixed with cinnabar oil.  ANIMATE WOOD  Transmutation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: One Small or smaller wooden object Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By touching a piece of wood you release the energy of the spell into it. The wood beginstowritheandtwistbeforeyoureyes and then rises to move in the direction you indicate. This spell imbues a Small or smaller wooden object with mobility and a semblance of life, then causes it to immediately attack whomever or whatever you initially designate. Statistics for the animated wood are as for a Small animated object (MM 13). Wooden  ANTICIPATE TELEPORTATION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: One willing creature touched Area: 5-ft./level radius emanation from touched creature Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The arcane words that activate this spell linger in the air for a moment. As they fade from your hearing, you become more aware of both your surroundings and the possibility of intrusion. The subject of the spell is surrounded with an invisible aura that anticipates and delays the teleportation of any creature into the spell’s area. Any teleportation spell or effect (including all spells with the teleportation descriptor) can be anticipated, making the spell’s recipient instantly aware of the exact location where the teleporting creature will arrive (subject to the restrictions below), the creature’s size, and how many other creatures (and their sizes) are arriving with the teleporting creature. The spell also delays the arrival of the teleporting creature by 1 round (so that it arrives on its initiative count immediately before its next turn), generally giving the recipient of the spell and anyone else made aware of the information 1 round to act or ready actions. The teleporting creature does not perceive this delay. Since a teleporting creature doesn’t necessarily arrive at the precise location it intends, the spell also functions against a creature that arrives in range even though its intended destination was elsewhere. For a creature that intends to teleport into range but inadvertently arrives outside the spell’s area, the spell gives the recipient awareness  that a creature has attempted to teleport into range and delays the creature as normal, but doesn’t give any awareness as to the actual location of its imminent arrival. The spell has no effect on creatures attempting to teleport away from the spell’s area, although if their destination is within the area, the spell will affect their reentry as normal. Focus: A tiny hourglass of platinum and crystal costing at least 500 gp, which must be carried or worn by the spell’s recipient while the spell is in effect.  ANTICIPATE TELEPORTATION, GREATER  CHAPTER 1  ANIMATE WATER  objects animated by this spell have hardness 5. The spell cannot animate objects carried or worn by a creature. Material Component: A mixture of powdered cinnabar and ground peach pit.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Animated snow does not have a hardness score. It possesses improved speed as if it had legs, granting it a speed of 30 feet, as well as the blind special ability (MM 13). In addition, each animated snow object has the cold subtype and deals an extra 1d6 points of cold damage on a successful hit. Animated snow objects take 1d6 points of damage per round in a place where the temperature is above freezing.  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6  This spell functions like anticipate teleportation, except that greater anticipate teleportation identiﬁes the type of the arriving creature (and any companions accompanying it) and creates a delay of 3 rounds, providing the recipient with even more warning and preparation time. Focus: A tiny hourglass of platinum and crystal ﬁlled with diamond dust, costing at least 1,000 gp. The hourglass must be carried or worn by the spell’s recipient while the spell is in effect.  ANTICOLD SPHERE  Abjuration [Cold] Level: Druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes As a rosy color ﬂickers into being in the surroundingair,youfeelasenseofwarmth and well-being. All creatures within the area of the spell gain immunity to cold damage. In addition, the emanation prevents the entrance of any creature with the cold subtype. The effect hedges out such creatures in the area when it is cast.  13  Note: Forcing an abjuration barrier against creatures that the spell keeps at bay collapses the barrier (PH 172).  As you cast this spell, an invisible ray projects from your ﬁngers. Where it strikesyourfoe,itripplesacrosshis body,likewaterspreadingacross a calm pond.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ANTIDRAGON AURA  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The target, if struck, functions as if it were inside an antimagic ﬁeld (PH 200) if it fails its Will save. If this spell is used against a creature, the subject can’t cast spells or use supernatural or spell-like abilities, nor do such abilities have any effect on the creature. However, the creature can still use spell completion items (such as scrolls) or spell trigger items (such as wands), even though it can’t cast the spells required. If this spell is used against an object, that object’s magical powers are suppressed—including any spells previously cast and currently in effect on the item, as well as any spells or magical effects targeted on the object during the antimagic ray’s duration. The spell doesn’t affect any objects other than the subject itself, even if those objects are worn, carried by, or in contact with the subject. For instance, if a creature is the target, its equipment remains unaffected. Material Component: A pinch of iron ﬁlings mixed with ruby dust worth 100 gp.  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/ 2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youunleashthepowerofthisspelland thenuggetofplatinumvanishesfrom your palm. Your companions are bathed in a white aura with a silver scale pattern overlaid upon it. All subjects gain a +2 luck bonus to Armor Class and on saving throws against the attacks, spells, and special attacks (extraordinary, supernatural, and spell-like) of dragons. This bonus increases by 1 for every four caster levels above 5th (to +3 at 9th, +4 at 13th, and a maximum of +5 at 17th). Material Component: A chunk of platinum worth at least 25 gp (slightly less than 1 ounce).  ANTIMAGIC RAY Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes  14  ANYSPELL  The gestures for casting arc of lightning . . .  Transmutation Level: Spell 3 Components: V, S, DF (and possibly M, F, and XP) Casting Time: 15 minutes Range: Personal Target: You Du ration: Instantaneous  Although there is no visible effect from thisspellcasting,youchanneldivinepower through your mind, shaping and transforming this energy into the potential to cast one arcane spell.  Transmutation Level: Spell 6  This spell functions like anyspell, except you can read and prepare any arcane spell of up to 5th level, and the prepared spell occupies your 6th-level domain spell slot.  APPRAISING TOUCH  Divination Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  ARC OF LIGHTNING  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 5, Windstorm 5 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: A line between two creatures Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No Static ﬁlls the air as you complete the spell. With a gesture you create magical conductivitybetweentwocreatures,anda boltofelectricityarcsbetweenthemwitha shockingly loud crackle. This bolt deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to both creatures and to anything in the line between them. Both creatures must be in range, and you must be able to target them both (as if this spell had them as its targets). Draw the line from any corner in one creature’s space to any corner in the other’s space. The bolt affects all squares in this line. Arcane Material Component: Two small iron rods.  Abjuration [Darkness] Level: Darkness 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The spell envelops the creature in a shroud of ﬂickering shadows. The shroud grants the subject a +4 deﬂection bonus to Armor Class plus an additional +1 for every three caster levels above 7th (for a total of +5 at 10th level, +6 at 13th, +7 at 16th, to a maximum of +8 at 19th level). The subject can see through the armor as if it did not exist and is also afforded darkvision out to 60 feet. The subject gains a +2 saving throw bonus against any holy, good, or light spells or effects. Undead creatures that are subjects of armor of darkness also gain +4 turn resistance.  CHAPTER 1  ANYSPELL, GREATER  You gain an intuitive insight into the value of objects you come into contact with. You gain a +10 insight bonus on Appraise checks to determine the value of items you touch while this spell is in effect. Using the Appraise skill in this fashion requires 2 minutes instead of the normal 1 minute. Even if you fail an Appraise check while this spell is in effect, you never mistakenly estimate the worth of an item by more than 50%.  ARMOR OF DARKNESS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Anyspell allows you to read and prepare any arcane spell of up to 2nd level. You must have an arcane magical writing (a scroll or spellbook) on hand to cast anyspell. During the spell’s 15-minute casting time, you can scan the spells available and choose one to read and prepare. Once you choose and prepare an arcane spell, you retain it in your mind. The prepared spell occupies your 3rd-level domain spell slot. If you read the spell from a spellbook, the book is unharmed, but reading a spell from a scroll erases the spell from the scroll. When you cast the arcane spell, it works just as though cast by a wizard of your cleric level except that your Wisdom score sets the save DC (if applicable). You must have a Wisdom of at least 10 + the arcane spell’s level to prepare and cast it. Your holy symbol substitutes for any noncostly material component. If the spell has a costly material component (one to which a gold piece value is assigned), you must provide it. If the spell has another focus, you must provide the focus. If the spell has an XP component, you must pay the experience point cost.  Encirclingyoureyewiththumbandforeﬁnger as if holding a jeweler’s lens, you speak the arcane words that complete the spell. Objects near you suddenly seem clearer, more in focus. You note blemishes and imperfections you had missed before.  ARROW MIND  Divination Level: Ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  . . . leave no doubt as to the source of the spell  15  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The bow in your hand feels more like an extensionofyourbodyasyoucompletethe spell—as if it’s become a part of your arm. Creaturesnearbyseemsharpertoyoureyes, more in focus. While this spell is in effect and you are wielding a projectile weapon that ﬁres arrows, such as a longbow or shortbow, you threaten all squares within your normal melee reach (5 feet if Small or Medium, 10 feet if Large) with your bow, allowing you to make attacks of opportunity with arrows shot from the bow. In addition, you do not provoke attacks of opportunity when you shoot a bow while you are in another creature’s threatened square. Material Component: A ﬂint arrowhead.  ARROW OF BONE  Necromancy [Death] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: One projectile or thrown weapon touched Duration: 1 hour/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes You complete the long ritual needed to cast the spell, scribing arcane runes into the item. It changes before your eyes into an identical item made of bone. The runes glowwithdarkmagicandtheweaponfeels cold to the touch. When thrown or ﬁred at a creature as a normal ranged attack, the weapon gains a +4 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls. In addition, any living creature struck by an arrow of bone must succeed on a Fortitude save or be instantly slain. A creature that makes its save instead takes 3d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20). Regardless of whether the attack hits, the magic of the arrow of bone is discharged by the attack, and the missile is destroyed. Material Component: A tiny sliver of bone and an oil of magic weapon (50 gp).  16  ARROW STORM  Transmutation Level: Ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Your bow glows blue for an instant and now feels as light as a feather in your hand. In your mind’s eye you see the arrows in your quiver, and your hand feels drawn to them. You can cast this spell only at the beginning of your turn, before you take any other actions. After casting arrow storm, you can use a full-round action to make one ranged attack with a bow with which you are proﬁcient against every foe within a distance equal to the weapon’s range increment. You can attack a maximum number of individual targets equal to your character level. If you choose not to spend a full-round action in this fashion after casting the spell, the spell has no effect.  ASPECT OF THE EARTH HUNTER  Transmutation Level: Druid 6, ranger 4 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) By completing the spell you call upon the world’sprimalenergies.Youfeeldisoriented for a moment as your face elongates into a snout, your limbs thicken, and your skin turns into silvery chitin. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a bulette (MM 30). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to magical beast, and your size changes to Huge. You have the space and reach of a bulette (15 feet/10 feet). You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average bulette (Str 27, Dex 15, Con 20), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your base land speed becomes 40 feet, and you gain a burrow speed of 10 feet. You gain  darkvision out to 60 feet. You also gain low-light vision, scent, and tremorsense out to 60 feet. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any extraordinary special abilities of your own form, as well as spell-like and supernatural abilities. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You cannot speak or cast spells while in bulette form. However, if you have the Natural Spell feat, you can cast spells normally. Your natural armor bonus becomes +12, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form. You can make two claw attacks, which are natural weapons that deal 2d8+8 points of damage. While in bulette form, you gain the bulette’s leap extraordinary attack form, allowing you to make four claw attacks instead of two. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Material Component: A small piece of a bulette’s armored shell.  ASPECT OF THE WOLF Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  With a howl you complete the spell. Instantly, your body sprouts short, thick fur.Yourspineandneckbend,causingyou to drop to your hands and knees—which quickly shorten into canine limbs. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a wolf (MM 283). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to animal, and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a wolf (5 ft./5 ft.). You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average wolf (Str 13, Dex 15, Con 15), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your base land speed becomes 50 feet. You gain low-light  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: See text Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  ATTUNE FORM  You touch the pebble against your allies’ ﬂesh and bring them into attunement with the plane.  ASSAY SPELL RESISTANCE  Divination Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Finishing the spell, your eyes glow with a pale blue radiance, and you understand how to overcome your foe’s resistance to your magic. This spell gives you a +10 bonus on caster level checks to overcome the spell resistance of a speciﬁc creature. Assay resistance is effective against only one speciﬁc creature per casting, and you must be able to see the creature when you cast the spell.  ASTRAL HOSPICE  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, M  Augment familiar makes a familiar more threatening than it appears  This spell can be cast only upon the Astral Plane (DMG 154). It opens up a small planar portal to a demiplane where natural healing can occur (unlike on the Astral Plane itself). The ﬁrm surface of the demiplane is roughly 50 feet square, and the demiplane extends 50 feet above the surface. The demiplane’s traits (including time, gravity, and magic) match those of the Material Plane, and the demiplane is self-contained; walking to one end returns a character to the point from which he began. The demiplane has no unusual planar traits.  Illus. by J. Nelson  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One creature/3 levels Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You ﬁsh out the gem and, ﬂoating in the AstralPlane,castthespell.Asmallpinprick of light appears next to you, widening to form a circular portal of a bronze hue. You step through the portal and begin the process of healing.  The only way in or out of the demiplane is through the entrance created by you, and only those named or described by you upon the casting of the spell can enter. The portal continues to exist and remains visible on the Astral Plane only while the hospice demiplane exists. When you leave the demiplane, the portal seals shut and vanishes. Anyone still in the hospice demiplane at that time appears on the Astral Plane at the location of the hospice’s entrance. Material Component: A single ﬂawless gemstone of at least 250 gp value.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  vision and scent. You gain a bite attack, which is a primary natural attack that deals 1d6+1 points of damage with each successful hit. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any extraordinary special abilities of your own form, as well as spell-like and supernatural abilities. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You cannot speak or cast spells while in wolf form. However, if you have the Natural Spell feat, you can cast spells normally. Your natural armor bonus becomes +2, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form. While in wolf form, you gain the wolf’s trip extraordinary attack form, allowing you to make a free trip attempt against any opponent that you hit with your bite attack. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Arcane Material Component: A whisker from a wolf.  This spell allows you to attune the affected creatures to the plane you are currently on, negating the harmful effects of that plane. Affected creatures gain the protections described in the avoid planar effects spell (page 19). ArcaneMaterialComponent: A bit of stone or earth from your home plane.  AUGMENT FAMILIAR  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Your familiar Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  17  Reaching out with magic, you empower your familiar, making it quicker and stronger.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  This spell grants your familiar a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution, damage reduction 5/magic, and a +2 resistance bonus on saving throws.  AURA AGAINST FLAME Abjuration Level: Cleric 2, druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  With the casting of this spell you are surrounded with a cool, blue mist that clings to your body, dampening the heat of the nearby ﬂames. You create an aura of blue mist that protects you against ﬁre, absorbing the ﬁrst 10 points of ﬁre damage as a resist energy (ﬁre) spell (PH 272). In addition to the resist energy (ﬁre) effect, the spell can be used to snuff out ﬁres. Any nonmagical ﬂame that the aura contacts is immediately extinguished if the ﬂame’s maximum damage is 10 or fewer points per round. This means that torches, small ﬁres, and hurled alchemist’s ﬁre are snuffed out and cause no damage if used against you or if you touch them. You can use a standard action to touch an existing magical ﬁre (such as a ﬂaming sphere or a wall of ﬁre) and attempt to dispel it as if using a dispel magic spell against it (use the caster level of aura against ﬂame for the caster level check). If you succeed, you take no damage from the touch and the magical ﬁre and aura both vanish. If you fail, you take damage from the magical ﬁre source normally (reduced by your aura against ﬂame), and both spells remain. With a readied action, you can use the aura as a dispel magic effect to counterspell a magical ﬁre attack against you. If successful, the spell is counterspelled and the aura disappears. If you fail the dispel check, or if the attack is not a ﬁre attack, the aura remains.  18  AURA OF EVASION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: No Spell Resistance: No “Stay together,” you shout, and intone the wordsofthisspell,castingthecrushedgemstone in the air at its conclusion. You are all bathed in a silver-green nimbus of light. You and all creatures within 10 feet of you gain evasion, but only against breath weapons. (If a breath weapon would normally allow a Reﬂex saving throw for half damage, a creature within an aura of evasion that successfully saves takes no damage instead.) Creatures within the spell’s area that already have evasion or improved evasion get a +4 bonus on Reﬂex saving throws against breath weapons. Material Component: Powdered emerald worth 500 gp.  AURA OF GLORY  Transmutation Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Area: 10-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You invoke the holy words and a soft golden light radiates from you. You feel surer of yourself, bolstered by the power of your beliefs. You channel divine power into yourself, spreading glory to your comrades. This spell removes any fear effect from all allies within your aura of courage.  AURA OF TERROR  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you  Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You speak a few curt words and your face is brieﬂy overlaid with the image of a violet-shaded skull. The skull fades, but the nimbus of violet light remains around you. You become surrounded by an aura of fear, granting you a frightful presence not unlike that of a dragon. Whenever you charge or attack, you inspire fear in all creatures within 30 feet that have fewer Hit Dice than your caster level. Each potentially affected opponent must succeed on a Will save or become shaken—a condition that lasts until the opponent is out of range. A successful save leaves that opponent immune to your frightful presence for 24 hours. If you cast this spell when you already have the frightful presence ability or a fear aura, the existing ability becomes more effective in the following ways: • The radius of the area affected by the ability increases by 10 feet. • The DC of your frightful presence ability increases by 2. • Creatures that would normally be shaken by your fear aura are frightened instead, and creatures that would normally be frightened are panicked.  AURA OF VITALITY  Transmutation Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Oneafteranother,yourcompanionsbegin toradiateasoft,goldenglow.Theybreathe deeply, suffused with additional mystic power. All subjects receive a +4 morale bonus to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution.  AVASCULAR MASS  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If the attack is successful, the subject loses half its hit points (rounded down) and is stunned for 1 round. On a successful Fortitude saving throw, the subject is not stunned. Oozes and plants are not affected by this spell. The avascular mass instantaneously erupts from the subject and must be anchored to at least two opposed points—such as ﬂoor and ceiling or opposite walls—or else the mass collapses and has no effect. Creatures caught within a 20-foot-radius avascular mass become entangled. The original target of the spell is automatically entangled. Because the avascular mass is magically animate and gradually tightens on those it holds, an entangled character who attempts to cast a spell must make a DC 25 Concentration check or lose the spell. Anyone within 20 feet of the primary target when the spell is cast must make a Reﬂex save. If this save succeeds, the creature is not stuck in the avascular mass and is free to act, though moving might be a problem (see below). If the save fails, the creature is stuck. A stuck creature can break loose by spending 1 round and succeeding on a DC 20 Strength check or a DC 25 Escape Artist check. Once loose (either from making the initial Reﬂex save or a later Strength check or Escape Artist check), a creature can progress  AVASCULATE  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Deathbound 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Youshootablackrayofnecromanticenergy fromyouroutstretchedhand,causingyour foe to violently purge blood or other vital ﬂuids through his skin. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If the attack succeeds, the subject is reduced to half of its current hit points (rounded down) and stunned for 1 round. On a successful Fortitude saving throw, the subject is not stunned.  AVOID PLANAR EFFECTS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2, druid 2, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: 20 ft. Targets: One creature/level in a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You gain a temporary respite from the natural effects of a speciﬁc plane. These effects include extremes in temperature, lack of air, poisonous fumes, emanations of positive or negative energy, or other attributes of the plane itself (DMG 150). Avoid planar effects provides protection from the 3d10 points of ﬁre damage that characters normally take when on a plane with the ﬁre-dominant trait. Avoid planar effects allows a character to breathe water on a waterdominant plane and ignore the threat of suffocation on an earth-dominant plane. A character protected by avoid planar effects can’t be blinded by the energy of a major positive-dominant plane and automatically stops gaining temporary hit points when they equal the character’s full normal hit point total. Negative-dominant planes don’t deal damage or bestow negative levels to characters protected by avoid planar effects. In addition, some effects speciﬁc to a plane are negated by avoid planar effects. In the D&D cosmology, avoid planar effects negates the deafening effect of Pandemonium and the cold damage on the Cania layer of the Nine Hells. The DM can add additional protections for a cosmology he creates. If the campaign has an Elemental Plane of Cold, for example, avoid planar effects protects against the base cold damage dealt to everyone on the plane. The effects of gravity traits, alignment traits, and magic traits aren’t negated by avoid planar effects, nor is the special entrapping trait of certain planes (such as Elysium and Hades). The spell does not provide protection against creatures, native or otherwise, nor does it protect against spells, special abilities, or extreme and nonnatural formations within the plane. This spell allows you to survive on the Elemental Plane of Earth, for instance, but it won’t protect you if you walk into a pool of magma on that same plane.  CHAPTER 1  Youshootablackrayofnecromanticenergy fromyouroutstretchedhand,causingyour foetoviolentlypurgebloodvesselsthrough its skin. The purged blood vessels spread outward, creating a many-layered mass of bloody, adhesive tissue that traps nearby creatures in a gory horror.  The danger of the plane surprises you, and youhavebarelytimetobarkoutafew elder words of power. In a moment you’re safe, and you gain a brief respite—time enough to cast more permanent protective spells.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Deathbound 8, sorcerer/ wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: See text Saving Throw: Fortitude partial and Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  through the writhing blood vessels very slowly. Each round devoted to moving allows the creature to make a new Strength check or Escape Artist check. The creature moves 5 feet for each full 5 points by which the check result exceeds 10. If you have at least 5 feet of avascular mass between you and an opponent, it provides cover. If you have at least 20 feet of avascular mass between you, it provides total cover. The avascular mass of entangling tissue persists for 1 round per caster level. When the duration elapses, the blood vessel mass becomes so much limp, decaying tissue.  19  Mass awaken creates powerful allies for a druid  AWAKEN, MASS  AWAKEN CONSTRUCT Transmutation Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 8 hours Range: Touch  AWAKEN SIN  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Good, Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One evil creature with Intelligence 3+ Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Acommandforrepentanceissuesfromyour mouth, carrying with it the power of the spell.Thecrushingfeelingofguiltthatgrew within you while you cast the spell lifts as you project the feeling at your target. The subject immediately takes 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) and is stunned for 1 round. If this knocks the subject unconscious, it also takes 1d6 points of Wisdom damage.  Whispering secret words to the undead before you, you call forth a glimmer of intelligence in its dead eyes. This spell grants intelligence to mindless undead such as skeletons and zombies. Undead creatures with Intelligence scores are unaffected. A mindless undead gains an Intelligence score of 1d6+4, subject to the limitation that an undead cannot be more intelligent than is typical of a living creature of the same kind. A dog skeleton simply has Intelligence 2 (no roll needed), while an orc skeleton makes the die roll but can’t have more than Intelligence 8. (See MM 290 for information on skills and feats the creature gains.) Undead regain the armor and weapon proﬁciencies they had in life (assume the undead were formerly warriors unless the DM speciﬁes otherwise) and will don armor and take up weapons while obeying your commands. A zombie ﬁghter can wear any armor and wield any simple or martial weapon, and a warhorse zombie can wear any armor. Undead also regain any extraordinary racial abilities they had in life, such as poison or scent. Awakened undead gain a +2 profane bonus on their Will saving throws to resist control undead. Awakened undead also gain +2 turn resistance (or retain their own turn resistance, if any, and if it is better than +2). Material Component: A humanoid ﬁnger bone. XP Cost: 250 XP.  Illus. by J. Jarvis  You awaken one or more trees or animals to humanlike sentience. All awakened creatures must be of the same kind. To succeed, you must make a Will save (DC 10 + the HD of the highest-HD target, or the HD the highest-HD tree has once awakened, whichever is greater). Failure indicates that the spell fails for all targets. The awakened animal or tree is friendly toward you. You have no special empathy or connection with it, but it serves you in speciﬁc tasks or endeavors if you communicate your desires to it. An awakened tree has characteristics as if it were an animated object (MM 13), except that its Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores are all 3d6. Awakened plants gain the ability to move their limbs, roots, vines, creepers, and so forth, and they have senses similar to a human’s. An awakened animal has 3d6 Intelligence, a +1d3 bonus to Charisma, and +2 HD. An awakened tree or animal can speak one language that you know, plus one additional language that you know per point of its Intelligence bonus, if it has one. (See MM 290 for information on skills and feats the creature gains.) XP Cost: 250 XP per creature awakened.  This spell awakens a humanoid-shaped construct to humanlike sentience. An awakened construct’s Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores are all 3d6. The spell does not work on constructs that are constructs only temporarily (such as objects affected by an animate objects spell). The awakened creature is independent of both you and the being who originally made it, though it is initially friendly toward both you and its maker. (See MM 290 for information on skills and feats the creature gains.) Material Component: The brain of a humanoid that has been dead less than 8 hours. XP Cost: 5,000 XP.  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Deathbound 6, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: All mindless undead within a circle with a radius of 25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  CHAPTER 1  After a full day of constant spellcasting, you ﬁnally succeed in bringing sentience to the subjects.  Tendrils of writhing light cover your hand and the brain it holds. The light disperses into the construct you touch, enveloping it in a soft white corona for several seconds before the creature’s body absorbs the radiance.  AWAKEN UNDEAD  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 24 hours Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One animal or tree/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Target: One construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  21  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  AXIOMATIC STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Lawful, Water] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You call upon the forces of law and a heavy rainbeginstofallaroundyou,itsraindrops harshandmetallic.Aboveyou,ajetofcaustic acid lances down from the heavens. A driving rain falls around you. It falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages chaotic creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (chaotic outsiders take double damage). In addition, each round, a gout of acid strikes a randomly selected chaotic outsider within the spell’s area, dealing 5d6 points of acid damage. After the spell’s duration expires, the water disappears. Material Component: A ﬂask of axiomatic water (see the axiomatic water spell, below).  You speak the ancient, slippery words as you pour the iron and silver into the ﬂask. Despite the fact that there is more powder than will ﬁt in the container, all of it dissolves, leaving a ﬂask of water dotted with motes of gunmetal gray. This transmutation imbues a ﬂask (1 pint) of water with the order of law, turning it into axiomatic water. Axiomatic water damages lawful outsiders the way holy water damages undead and evil outsiders. A ﬂask of axiomatic water can be thrown as a splash weapon. Treat this attack as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 10 feet. A ﬂask breaks if thrown against the body of a corporeal creature, but to use it against an incorporeal creature, the bearer must open the ﬂask and pout the axiomatic water out onto the target. Thus, a character can douse an incorporeal creature with axiomatic water only if he is adjacent to it. Doing so is a ranged touch attack that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. A direct hit by a ﬂask of axiomatic water deals 2d4 points of damage to a chaotic outsider. Each such creature within 5 feet of the point where the ﬂask hits takes 1 point of damage from the splash. MaterialComponent: 5pounds ofpowdered iron and silver (worth 25 gp).  BABAU SLIME  Transmutation Level: Abyss 3, druid 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You press the viscous ball of demon sweat betweenyourﬁngersandspeaktheeldritch words. Your ﬂesh and equipment begin to weep hot red tears that quickly form a coating over your body.  This demon-inspired transmutation causes the subject to secrete a slimy red layer of jelly that coats its skin, armor, and equipment. A creature that strikes a slime-protected subject with an unarmed strike, a touch attack (including a touch spell), or a natural weapon takes 1d8 points of acid damage. Any creature in a grapple with the target of babau slime takes 1d8 points of acid damage at the beginning of its turn. Arcane Material Component: A drop of babau slime.  AXIOMATIC WATER Transmutation [Lawful] Level: Cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Flask of water touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  Backbiter turns a weapon against its wielder  22  BACKBITER  You cast this spell on any melee weapon. The next time that weapon is used to make a melee attack, its shaft twists around so that the weapon strikes the wielder instead. The weapon hits automatically, and no attack roll is made. The wielder gets no warning or knowledge of the spell’s effect on his weapon, and although he makes the attack, the self-dealt damage can’t be consciously reduced (though damage reduction applies) or changed to nonlethal damage. Once the weapon attacks its wielder (whether successfully or not), the spell is discharged. Magic weapons targeted by this spell receive a Will save. An item in a creature’s possession uses its own Will save bonus or its wielder’s bonus, whichever is higher. Focus: A dagger.  BACKLASH  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You touch your opponent and a red aura entwines him, then fades without further effect. You back away as your opponent laughs and begins to cast a spell.  Divination Level: Druid 2, ranger 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  Asyouperformtheﬁnalgesturesofthespell you feel magic surround you, pushing on you from all sides as if trying to help keep you standing tall. You gain a +4 insight bonus on Balance checks. If you have sufﬁcient ranks in the Balance skill, you can even balance on an otherwise-impossible surface with a DC 20 Balance check. If you have 5 or more ranks in Balance, you can balance on vertical surfaces; the normal modiﬁer for a sloped or angled surface no longer applies to you, though other DC modiﬁers (such as for a slippery surface) do apply. If you balance on a vertical surface, you can move up or down as if you were climbing. However, you are not actually climbing, so you can make attacks normally, retain your Dexterity bonus to Armor Class, and generally follow the rules of the Balance skill rather than the Climb skill. If you have 10 or more ranks in Balance, you can balance on liquids, semisolid surfaces such as mud or snow, or similar surfaces that normally couldn’t support your weight. For each consecutive round that you begin balanced on a particular surface of this sort, the DC of your Balance check increases by 5. As with all uses of the Balance skill, you move at half speed unless you decide to use the accelerated movement option (thereby increasing the DC of the Balance check by 5). Arcane Material Component: A thin, 3-inch-long wooden dowel.  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Two creatures of up to Large size Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Seeingyourfriendimperiled,youcastabout for a likely target and settle upon a nearby foe.Withaword,yourallystandsfreewhile your foe faces death.  CHAPTER 1  Theweaponyouindicateduringthespell’s castingbrieﬂyshimmerswithablackaura that disappears in an eyeblink.  BALANCING LORECALL  BALEFUL TRANSPOSITION  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One weapon Duration: 1 round/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  The ﬁrst time the target creature attempts to cast a spell or use a spelllike ability, the magic of that spell backﬁres. The spell is expended, and the creature takes 1d6 points of damage per level of the spell being cast. This discharge ends the spell.  Two target creatures, of which you can be one, instantly swap positions. A solid object such as the ground, a bridge, or a rope must connect the creatures. Both subjects must be within range. Objects carried by the creatures (up to the creatures’ maximum loads) go with them, but other creatures do not, even if they are carried. The movement is instantaneous and does not provoke attacks of opportunity. If either creature succeeds on its Will save, the spell is negated.  BALL LIGHTNING  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One lightning ball Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes Withacircuitouspassofyourhandthrough theair,acracklingballoflightningappears before you, accompanied by the smell of ozone. You create a 5-foot-diameter ball of concentrated electricity that rolls in whichever direction you point, dealing electricity damage to creatures it strikes. It moves 30 feet per round. As part of this movement, it can ascend or jump up to 30 feet to strike a subject. If it enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for the round and deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per caster level  23  Illus. b M. Phillippi  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  (maximum 15d6), though a successful Reﬂex save negates that damage. The ball moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action for you), otherwise it merely stays at rest, damaging any creature in its space. It cannot push aside unwilling creatures or batter down large obstacles. The lightning winks out if it exceeds the spell’s range. Material Component: A handful of copper and iron pellets.  BALOR NIMBUS  Transmutation Level: Abyss 4, Cleric 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You smash the soot against your ﬂesh and intone the ancient, dark words. Like the legendary balor, your body bursts into lurid ﬂames.  The ﬂames created by this spell do not harm you or any equipment you carry or wear. Each round, the ﬂames deal 6d6 points of ﬁre damage to any creature grappling you (or any creature you grapple) on your turn. Arcane Material Component: A pinch of soot.  BANDS OF STEEL  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: No Theinterlockinghoopsbecomebrieﬂyhot thendisappearevenassimilar,largerbands streakfromyouroutstretchedhandtoward thecreatureyouindicate.Withasatisfying metallic clank, the bands wrap around the indicated creature. The victim must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be immobilized and thus unable to move. If the saving throw succeeds, the victim is only partially trapped by the bands, and is entangled. A creature immobilized by the bands can attempt to escape as a fullround action, either by bursting free  Ball lightning’s versatility makes it an effective spell in many situations  (Strength DC 18) or wriggling out (Escape Artist DC 18). An entangled creature can use a fullround action to break free (Strength DC 13) or disentangle itself (Escape Artist DC 13). Material Component: Three small silver hoops, interlocked.  BARGHEST’S FEAST  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: Corpse touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) The diamond in your hand turns to coal, and then to dust, which sprinkles down upon the corpse. Where it strikes, ebon ﬂames spring up, and when the ﬂames pass nothing remains, not even grave dust. “Return from that one,” you mutter. Black ﬂames ﬂicker over a corpse, utterly consuming it. You destroy the remains of a dead person or creature,  preventing any form of raising or resurrection that requires part of the corpse. There is a 50% chance that a wish, miracle, or true resurrection spell cannot restore to life a victim consumed by a barghest’s feast spell. Check once for each destroyed creature. If the d% roll fails, the creature cannot be brought back to life by mortal magic. Material Component: A diamond worth 5,000 gp.  BATTERING RAM  24  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One object or creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  BATTLE HYMN  Enchantment (Charm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: All allies within 30 ft. Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You wave your hand as if a conductor and hum an uplifting tune under your breath. As the energy of the spell releases, you hear the air around you ﬁll with the song you are humming, as if performed by a small troupe.  Transmutation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level Withcrackleofpoppingjointsandtendons, yourhandsandﬁngersbecomelongcurving claws with heavy knuckles. You gain two claw attacks that act as slashing melee weapons, dealing 1d4 points of damage with a threat range of 19–20. Attacks with your transformed hands do not provoke attacks of opportunity. Your claws work just like the natural weapons of many monsters. You can make an attack with one claw or a full attack with two claws at your normal attack bonus, replacing your normal attack routine. You take no penalties for two-weapon ﬁghting, and neither attack is a secondary attack. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional  CHAPTER 1  You create a ramlike force that can strike with considerable power. The force can target a creature or an object. The force deals 1d6 points of damage to the subject. If the subject is a creature, this attack initiates a bull rush (as a Medium creature with Strength 30, for a +10 bonus on the bull rush attempt). If the subject is a movable object, such as a door, you can make a Strength check (with a +10 bonus) to attempt to force open the door. Focus: A piece of carved ram’s horn.  BEAST CLAWS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You point the shard of carved ram’s horn at your foe and snap off the last words of the spell.Aninvisiblewedgeofforceslamsinto the creature’s midsection, doubling it over and driving it back.  within the area who are friendly to you. These creatures can reroll one Will save that they have just made each round for the duration of the spell. The reroll must be made before the DM declares whether the roll results in success or failure, and the result of the second roll must be used, even if it is a lower result.  attacks—you simply have two claw attacks at your normal attack bonus. If you attack with a manufactured weapon or another natural attack, you can’t make any claw attacks in that round. The claws do not hinder your manual dexterity or spellcasting. Material Component: The claw of a bird of prey, such as an eagle or falcon.  BEASTLAND FEROCITY Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You cast the spell and lay your hand upon yourally,andbeneathyourglowingﬁngers, give him a mixed gift—the ability to ﬁght on, but at the cost of not knowing when to stop. The subject becomes such a tenacious combatant that it continues to ﬁght without penalty even while disabled or dying. While between –1 and –9 hit points, the creature gains a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength. If the creature is reduced to –10 hit points, it dies normally.  This spell brings forth a stirring martial tune that inspires all creatures  25  BEGET BOGUN  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Tiny construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With the bogun made, you take the ﬁnal step and imbue it with sentience,  breathing life into your new servant and companion. Beget bogun allows you to infuse living magic into a small mannequin that you have created from vegetable matter. This is the ﬁnal spell in the process of creating a bogun. See the bogun’s description for further details. Material Component: The mannequin from which the bogun is created. XP Cost: 25 XP.  Transmutation [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You uncork the vial and speak the old words.Thesmokeissuesfromthebottleand Bogun  CR 1  N, CN, LN, NE, or NG Tiny construct Init +3; Senses darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision; Listen +1, Spot +1 Languages telepathic link with master AC 15, touch 15, flat-footed 12 hp 11 (2 HD) Fort +0, Ref +3, Will +1 Speed 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (good) Melee nettles +1 (1d4–2 plus poison) Space 2-1/2 ft.; Reach 0 ft. Base Atk +1; Grp –5 Atk Options poison (nettles, DC 11, 1d6 Dex/1d6 Dex) Abilities Str 7, Dex 16, Con —, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 10 SQ construct traits (MM 307) Feats Stealthy Skills Hide +10, Move Silently +9  A bogun is a small nature servant created by a druid. Like a homunculus, it is an extension of its creator, sharing the same alignment and link to nature. A bogun does not fight particularly well, but it can perform any simple action, such as attacking, carrying a message, or opening a door or window. For the most part, a bogun simply carries out its creator’s instructions. Because it is self-aware and somewhat willful, however, its behavior is not entirely predictable. On rare occasions (5% of the time), a bogun might refuse to perform a particular task. In that case, the creator must make a DC 11 Diplomacy check to convince the creature to cooperate. Success means the bogun performs the task as requested; failure indicates that it either does exactly the opposite or refuses to do anything at all for 24 hours (DM’s option as to which). A bogun cannot speak, but the process of creating one links it telepathically with its creator. It knows what its creator knows and can convey to him or her everything it sees and hears, up to a range of 500 yards. A bogun never travels beyond this range willingly, though it can be removed forcibly. In that case, it does everything in its power to regain contact  with its creator. An attack that destroys a bogun also deals its creator 2d10 points of damage. If its creator is slain, a bogun also dies, and its body collapses into a heap of rotting vegetation. A bogun looks like a vaguely humanoid mound of compost. The creator determines its precise features, but a typical bogun stands about 18 inches tall and has a wingspan of about 2 feet. Its skin is covered with nettles and branches. Combat: A bogun attacks by brushing against opponents with harsh nettles that deliver an irritating poison. Construction: Unlike a homunculus, a bogun is created from natural materials available in any forest. Thus, there is no gold piece cost for its creation. All materials used become permanent parts of the bogun. The creator must be at least 7th level and possess the Craft Wondrous Item feat to make a bogun. Before casting any spells, the creator must weave a physical form out of living (or once-living) vegetable matter to hold the magical energy. A bit of the creator’s own body, such as a few strands of hair or a drop of blood, must also be incorporated into this crude mannequin. The creator can assemble the body personally or hire someone else to do it. Creating this mannequin requires a DC 12 Craft (basketweaving or weaving) check. Once the body is finished, the creator must animate it through an extended magical ritual that requires a week to complete. The creator must labor for at least 8 hours each day in complete solitude in a forest grove; any interruption from another sentient creature undoes the magic. If the creator is personally weaving the creature’s body, that process and the ritual can be performed together. When not actively working on the ritual, the creator must rest and can perform no other activities except eating, sleeping, or talking. Missing even one day causes the process to fail. At that point, the ritual must be started anew, though the previously crafted body and the grove can be reused. On the final day of the ritual, the creator must personally cast control plants, wood shape, and beget bogun. These spells can come from outside sources, such as scrolls, rather than being prepared, if the creator prefers. 26  BELKER CLAWS  wraps itself around your hand, turning it into smoke as well.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  With a successful touch attack, you deal 2d12 points of damage. For every three caster levels, the smoke lasts for another round (to a maximum of 4 additional rounds at 12th level), dealing another 2d12 points of damage per round. Material Component: A small vial of smoke.  BENIGN TRANSPOSITION  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Two willing creatures of up to Large size Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  The belker claws spell makes a spellcaster’s touch a potent weapon  The spellcaster places a curse on the creature touched, choosing one of the three following effects.  Two target creatures, of which you can be one, instantly swap positions. Both subjects must be within range. Objects carried by the creatures (up to the creatures’ maximum loads) go with them, but other creatures do not, even if they are carried. The movement is instantaneous and does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  • One ability score is reduced to 1, or two ability scores take –6 penalties (to a minimum score of 1). • –8 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks. • Each turn, the subject has a 25% chance to act normally; otherwise, it takes no action.  BESTOW CURSE, GREATER  Necromancy Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Channelingyourhatredintobindingwords of power, you thrust your hand at your foe and proclaim a terrible curse.  You can also invent your own curse, but it should be no more powerful than those described above, and the Dungeon Master has the ﬁnal say on the curse’s effect. A greater curse cannot be dispelled, nor can it can be removed with break enchantment or limited wish. A miracle or wish spell removes a greater curse, as does remove curse cast by a spellcaster of at least 17th level.  BINDING WINDS  Evocation [Air] Level: Druid 2, Windstorm 2 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Concentration Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by E. Polak  Callingoutthearcanewords,yousuddenly stand where your companion was, and he has taken your place, outside the reach of his foes.  Callinguponthepowerofelementalair,you encircle the target in whipping winds. The subject can act normally, but it cannot move from its current location. The winds carry its voice away, so it can speak but cannot be heard, and it cannot hear anything but the roar of the winds. This spell distracts spellcasters, and so a Concentration check is required to successfully cast any spell (DC equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). Furthermore, no sonic or languagedependent spells or effects can be cast into or out of the winds (though spells cast by you upon yourself function normally). Ranged attacks made into or out of the winds take a –2 penalty. Binding winds holds ﬂying creatures in midair.  27  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  BITE OF THE KING  Necromancy Level: Gluttony 8, Hunger 8 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One living creature of a size that does not exceed caster’s Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your mouth opens impossibly wide and engulfs your foe. You swallow loudly and yourmouthreturnstonormalsize,leaving no trace of your foe behind. When you cast this spell, you can send a creature to a pocket “stomach” dimension with a successful melee touch attack. The target you touch must make a successful Fortitude save. If it fails its saving throw, the creature is sent to the stomach dimension. The victim takes 2d8+12 points of bludgeoning damage and 12 points of acid damage per round while in the stomach dimension. The victim can cut its way out by using a light slashing or piercing weapon to deal 35 points of damage to the stomach dimension (AC 21). A creature that successfully exits appears to cut its way free from thin air, appearing in a space adjacent to you. Each time you cast this spell, you create a separate temporary stomach dimension.  BITE OF THE WEREBEAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level With an inhuman roar, your face extends and expands, and your hands enlarge into clawedpaws.Powerfulmusclebuildsunder your skin, and you become a half-bear creature. You gain a +16 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +2 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +8 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +7 enhancement  28  bonus to natural armor. Your hands become claws, granting you two claw attacks, and your mouth becomes that of a bear, giving you a bite attack. You can attack with both claws at your full attack bonus, but your bite attack takes a –2 penalty (as if you had the Multiattack feat). Each claw deals 1d8 points of damage (1d6 if you are Small) + your Str modiﬁer, and your bite deals 2d8 points of damage (2d6 if you are Small) + 1/2 your Str modiﬁer. You gain the beneﬁts of the Blind-Fight and Power Attack feats, as well. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A tuft of bear fur.  BITE OF THE WEREBOAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youshakeyourhead,andyourfacereshapes itself into the visage of a boar. As this happens,yourbodybecomesbulkier,andyour shoulders and back bristle with hair. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +6 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +8 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Your face becomes that of a boar, and you gain a bite attack that deals 1d8 points of damage (or 1d6 points if you are Small) + 1-1/2 times your Str modiﬁer. You also gain the beneﬁt of the Blind-Fight feat. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: Four boar bristles.  BITE OF THE WERERAT Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  Withasneeze,yougrowawhiskeredsnout and ratlike tail as ﬁne gray fur covers your thickening skin. You gain a +6 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +2 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +3 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Your face lengthens into a ratlike snout, and you gain a bite attack that deals 1d4 points of damage (or 1d3 points if you are Small) + 1-1/2 times your Str modiﬁer. You also gain the beneﬁt of the Weapon Finesse feat. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A rat’s tail.  BITE OF THE WERETIGER  Transmutation Level: Druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Yousnarl,andyourfeaturesshiftintothose of a tiger. Your hands grow sharp claws, and the thick skin and striped fur of a tiger covers your body. You gain a +12 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +6 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +5 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Your hands become claws, granting you two claw attacks, and your mouth becomes that of a tiger, giving you a bite attack. You can attack with both claws at your full base attack bonus, but your bite attack takes a –2 penalty (as if you had the Multiattack feat). Each claw deals 1d8 points of damage (1d6 if you are Small) + your Str modiﬁer, and your bite deals 2d6 points of damage (2d6 if you are Small) + 1/2 your Str modiﬁer. You gain the beneﬁts of the Blind-Fight and Power Attack feats, as well. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A tiger’s claw.  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  BLACKFIRE  BLACK BLADE OF DISASTER  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial and Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Sword-shaped planar rift Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  With the dark words still on your tongue, a rayofblackenergyspringsfromyourhand towraptheindicatedtargetinblackﬂames that absorb heat rather than create it. The blackﬁrecracklesandhisses,emanatingthe smells of hot metal and sulfur.  Asyoucastthespell,alargeblacktearinthe universe appears in the form of a crackling ebony sword made of the material of the planes. The blade ﬂies off at your mental command to destroy your foes. You create a black blade-shaped planar rift about 3 feet long. The blade strikes at any creature within its range, as you desire, starting the round you cast the spell. The blade makes a melee touch attack against its designated target once each round. Its attack bonus is equal to your base attack bonus + your Intelligence bonus or your Charisma bonus (for wizards and sorcerers, respectively).  Illus. by W. England  You gain a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +4 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor. You gain a bite attack that deals 1d6 points of damage (or 1d4 points if you are Small) + 1-1/2 times your Str modiﬁer. You also gain the beneﬁt of the Blind-Fight feat. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A wolf’s tooth.  CHAPTER 1  A howl erupts from your lips as your face contorts and expands into a wolﬂike form.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Anything hit by the blade is disintegrated if it fails a Fortitude save, taking 2d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 40d6), or 5d6 points of damage if the saving throw is successful. The blade can pass through any magical barrier equal to or less than its spell level, but cannot penetrate dead magic areas or an antimagic ﬁeld. It can harm ethereal and incorporeal creatures as if it were a force effect. The blade always strikes from your direction. It does not get a ﬂanking bonus or help a combatant get one. If the blade exceeds its range or goes out of your line of sight, the spell ends. You can direct the blade to attack another target as a standard action. A gate spell can be used to counterspell a black blade of disaster. A dimensional anchor spell cast at the blade dispels it automatically. The blade cannot be harmed by physical attacks, but dispel magic, a sphere of annihilation, or a rod of cancellation can affect it. Its touch attack AC is 13.  BITE OF THE WEREWOLF  A black blade of disaster can bring death to any creature it touches  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. On a successful attack, a living target is engulfed in chill black ﬂames that feed on the fuel of their victim’s life force. A creature engulfed in blackﬁre must make a successful Fortitude save each round that the spell is in effect or take 1d4 points of Constitution damage and become nauseated. A creature that makes its Fortitude save takes no  29  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  damage for that round and is sickened instead. In addition to its effects on the subject, blackﬁre can spread rapidly. Each round on its turn, any living creature adjacent to a creature engulfed in blackﬁre must succeed on a Reﬂex save or become engulfed itself. Any creature that has its Constitution reduced to 0 or lower by the spell is turned into a pile of black ash and can be returned to life only by true resurrection or wish, the caster of which must succeed on a DC 30 caster level check to restore the victim to life. If a creature succeeds on its Fortitude save in 3 consecutive rounds, the blackﬁre affecting it gutters out. The black ﬂames cannot otherwise be extinguished by normal means (such as immersion in water or smothering), but antimagic ﬁeld, a successful dispel magic, remove curse, or break enchantment snuffs it out. As well, a creature protected by death ward has immunity to blackﬁre’s effects. Material Component: A pinch of dust from a vampire destroyed by sunlight.  With a few short words of power, you draw the light from the surrounding area. Within just a few seconds, the light dims to utter darkness. You create an area of total darkness. The darkness is impenetrable to normal vision and darkvision, but you can see normally within the blacklit area. Creatures outside the spell’s area, even you, cannot see through it.  Range: 0 ft. Effect: Swordlike column of gnashing teeth Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Athree-foot-longcolumnofdisembodiedgnashingteethspringsforth from your hand. For the duration of the spell, you can make melee touch attacks that deal 1d6 points of damage +1 point per two caster levels (maximum +10). Your Strength modiﬁer does not apply to the damage. A creature that you successfully deal damage to must also make a Will saving throw or become frightened for 1d4 rounds.  BLADE STORM  Transmutation Level: Ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  BLACKLIGHT  Evocation [Darkness] Level: Darkness 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: A 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or point in space Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates or none (object) Spell Resistance: Yes or no (object)  30  You can cast the spell on a point in space, but the effect is stationary unless you cast it cast on a mobile object. You can cast the spell on a creature, and the effect then radiates from the creature and moves as it moves. Unattended objects and points in space do not get saving throws or beneﬁt from spell resistance.  Wands provide spellcasters with a way to keep spells on hand even when their daily spells are exhausted  Blacklight counters or dispels any light spell of equal or lower level, such as daylight. Material Component: A piece of coal and the dried eyeball of any creature.  BLADE OF PAIN AND FEAR  Evocation Level: Assassin 2, blackguard 2, cleric 3, Deathbound 2, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action  With a thought and a word you completethespell.Yourweapons shift color, becoming blue for a moment,andfeellighterinyour hands. An unseen force guides them, pulling them toward your enemies. You can cast this spell only at the beginning of your turn, before you take any other actions. After casting blade storm, you can take a full-round action to make one attack with each melee weapon you are currently wielding against every foe within reach. If you wield more than one weapon, or a double weapon, you can attack each foe once with each weapon or end, using the normal rules for two-weapon ﬁghting (PH 160). So, a ranger wielding a longsword and a short sword could attack each opponent he can reach with both weapons. If you choose not to spend a full-round action in this fashion after casting the spell, the spell has no effect.  BLADE THIRST  Transmutation Level: Ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: One slashing weapon Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  BLADES OF FIRE  Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Targets: Up to two melee weapons you are wielding Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Withawordyourweaponsburstintoﬂame. Youfeelnoheatandtheﬂamesmerelytickle your skin. Your melee weapons each deal an extra 1d8 points of ﬁre damage. This damage stacks with any energy damage your weapons already deal.  BLADEWEAVE  Illusion [Pattern] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: See text With a shout you unleash the power of the spell, causing every movement you make with your weapon to seem beautiful and full of ﬂourish.  Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No As you cast the spell, your hand becomes sheathedinbarelyperceptibleyellowﬂames. With a roar, the ﬂames burst from your hand in the shape of a cone, leaving your hand trailing wisps of smoke. Flames ﬁll the area, dealing 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to any creature in the area that fails its saving throw. Material Component: A bit of wick soaked in oil.  BLAST OF FORCE  Evocation [Force] Level: Force 3, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Drawinguponmagicinitspurestform,you sendinvisibleenergywhistlingthroughthe air to batter your foe. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A blast of force deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). In addition, a successful hit forces the subject to make a Fortitude save or be knocked prone (size and stability modiﬁers apply to the saving throw as if the spell were a bull rush).  BLESS WEAPON, SWIFT Transmutation Level: Paladin 1  Youinvoketheholywordsquickly,andyour weapon ﬂashes a momentary blue-white radiance. This spell functions like bless weapon (PH 205), except as noted above.  BLESSED AIM  Divination Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 50 ft. Effect: 50-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You grant a slashing weapon a +3 enhancement bonus. The weapon sheds illumination as if it were a torch.  BLAST OF FLAME  Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Duration: 1 round  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You touch a blade, and it catches ﬁre. Unearthly blue ﬂames crackle along its length while the weapon beneath remains cold and unharmed.  Once per round, choose one target that you successfully attacked with a melee weapon. That creature must succeed on a Will save or be dazed for 1 round. Spell resistance applies to this effect.  With the blessing of your deity, you bolster your allies’ aim with an exhortation. This spell grants your allies within the spread a +2 morale bonus on ranged attack rolls.  BLESSING OF BAHAMUT  Abjuration [Good] Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You hear a distant dragon’s roar that no one else detects, and your skin takes on a platinum sheen. You gain damage reduction 10/magic for the spell’s duration. MaterialComponent:Acanaryfeather, which is ﬂung into the air.  BLINDING BREATH Transmutation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4  You expel your breath weapon, which crackles with eye-splitting intensity.  31  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The blessed aim spell grants all of a blackguard’s nearby allies a better chance to hit with ranged attacks  This spell functions like breath ﬂare (page 38), except that targets that fail their saving throws against your breath weapon are permanently blinded, rather than dazzled.  BLINDING SPITTLE  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One missile of spit Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Whipping your head forward with the last word of the spell, you spit a globule of dark liquid at your foe. You spit caustic saliva into your target’s eyes with a successful ranged touch attack. A –4 penalty applies to the attack roll. The subject is blinded until it can wash its eyes with water or some other rinsing ﬂuid, which requires a standard action.  32  This spell has no effect on creatures without eyes or creatures that don’t depend on eyes for vision.  BLINDSIGHT  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your intended subject, which then turns its head rapidly about as if looking for the source of some sound. This spell grants the subject the blindsight ability (MM 306) effective out to 30 feet.  BLINDSIGHT, GREATER Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, druid 4  This spell functions like blindsight, except as noted above and that the blindsight granted by the spell is effective out to 60 feet.  BLINK, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Bard 5, Celerity 8, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Animmaterialfogdescendsoveryoureyes asyoucompletethespell.Youperceivethe closeness of a parallel, ethereal reality, and youknowthatyoucanpassfreelybetween that world and the one upon which you stand. This spell functions like blink (PH 206), except that you have control over the timing of your “blinking” back and forth between the Ethereal Plane and the Material Plane. You can also ready an action to blink away from any physical or magical attack. The attack misses automatically unless it also affects ethereal targets (as a force effect does). While blinking, you have no chance of interfering  with your own attacks or your own spells. When moving through solid objects, you do not risk materializing inside one unless you actually end your movement there, in which case you materialize and are shunted off to the nearest open space, taking 1d6 points of damage per 5 feet traveled in this manner.  As you conclude the ritual to release the energyofthespell,youhurlablazingballof light toward the point you designate, and it erupts into a brilliant hovering sphere. All sighted creatures in the area are dazzled (no save), and the heat from the blistering radiance deals 2d6 points of ﬁre damage to all creatures and objects in the area each round on your turn (Fortitude half). Like a ﬁreball spell, blistering radiance erupts if it strikes any material body or solid barrier before attaining the prescribed range, and you must make a successful ranged touch attack to send the sphere through a narrow opening or passage. Blistering radiance counters or dispels any darkness spell of equal or lower level. Material Component: A bit of tinder and a small lens.  BLOOD FRENZY  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Any creature with the rage ability Duration: Special; see text Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  BLOOD SIROCCO  Evocation Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Effect: Cone-shaped emanation centered on you or on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a hot exhalation and a circular wave of your outstretched arm, a stiﬂing wind tearsacrossthelandscape,kickingupclouds of dust and sand and spreading out to blow over your foes. A blood sirocco blows out from your location with the force of a windstorm (DMG 95). Creatures in the affected area of Small or smaller size are knocked prone and rolled 1d4×10 feet, taking 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet. Medium creatures are knocked prone, and creatures of Large or Huge size are unable to move toward the origin point of the cone. A successful Fortitude save allows the creature to move normally in that round. In addition, the stiﬂing winds dehydrate those within the cone. In each round when an affected living creature fails its saving throw, it takes 2 points of damage. The wind of a blood sirocco automatically extinguishes candles, torches, and similar unprotected ﬂames. It causes protected ﬂames, such as those of lanterns, to dance wildly and has a 50% chance to extinguish these lights. The wind of a blood sirocco continues to blow from the origin point to the wide end of the cone for the duration of the spell. Any creature within this area is entitled a saving throw each round to ignore the effects of the blood sirocco.  Necromancy [Water] Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Up to ﬁve living creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Youforcefullyspit,endingyourspellcasting. Fromwhereyouspatarisesasea-greenorb of energy for each creature you intend as a subject of the spell. The orbs ﬂy to their designated targets and turn blood red as they impact.  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Fire, Light] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 50-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None and Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  The target creature enters a rage, as its rage special ability, but this rage does not count toward the creature’s number of rage attempts per day.  BLOOD TO WATER  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  BLISTERING RADIANCE  A hot rush of anger ﬂows through your target’s veins.  You transmute the subjects’ blood into pure water, dealing 2d6 points of Constitution damage. A successful Fortitude save halves the Constitution damage. This spell has no effect on living creatures with the ﬁre or water subtype.  BLOOD WIND  Evocation Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 caster levels) Target: A single creature with Intelligence 4 or higher Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) After you complete the spell, the subject’s limbs ripple with power and grow slightly in length. The subject can take a full attack action to use all of its natural weapons or unarmed strikes as if they were thrown weapons with a 20-foot range increment. The subject gestures as if making a melee attack, but the result of the attack affects a target within range. This spell does not actually grant reach, and so does not help provide a ﬂanking bonus or allow the subject to make attacks of opportunity at any range greater than normal. The  33  subject uses its normal melee attack bonuses and deals damage normally if it hits, though the target of the attacks can beneﬁt from cover or concealment.  Illub. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  BLOODHOUND  34  Divination Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 24 hours (D) A white ﬁlm slips over your vision. Strangely,youreyesseemmorefocusedand younotebarelyperceptibletracesofpassage that you had missed before. If you fail a Survival check to track a creature while this spell functions, you can immediately attempt another roll against the same DC to reestablish the trail. If the reroll fails, you must search for the trail for 30 minutes (if outdoors) or 5 minutes (if indoors) before trying again. A blood sirocco leeches away life by drawing blood into its howling winds  BLOODSTAR  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A bloodstar Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes In a ruby ﬂash a blood-colored, glowing crystal appears near your foes to suck the blood from their wounds. You create a magic construct called a bloodstar that shoots from your hand and hovers in the air anywhere within the limit of the range (each round, you can move the bloodstar anywhere within range with a standard action spent concentrating on the new position). The bloodstar pulses with ruby light (providing illumination in a 20-foot radius). Any creature you initially designate within 10 feet of the bloodstar that takes damage from any source must make a saving throw. On a failed save, the victim takes 1 point  of Constitution damage. Each time victims are damaged, they can attempt new saves. The bloodstar cannot be attacked or harmed by physical attacks. Focus: A ruby worth at least 30 gp.  BODAK’S GLARE  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Abyss 8, Cleric 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youinvokethepowersofdeepdarknessand your eyes vanish, looking like holes in the universe itself. Upon completion of the spell, you target a creature within range that can see you. That creature dies instantly unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save. The target need not meet your gaze. If you slay a humanoid creature with this attack, 24 hours later it transforms into a bodak (MM 28) unless it has been resurrected in the meantime. The bodak is not under your command, but can be controlled as normal with a rebuke undead check. Focus: A black onyx gem worth at least 500 gp.  BODY BLADES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  BODY HARMONIC  Transmutation Level: Bard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Yourubtherimofawater-ﬁlledglass,causing it to emit a piercing tone. As you chant a simple poem you feel the glass in your handcracklewithenergy,causingthehand holding it to become slightly numb. As you rub the glass, the targeted creature’s body begins to vibrate loudly and painfully in harmony with the tone. Each round you continue to concentrate on this spell, the victim takes 1d10 points of damage to one ability score. You must select a different ability score each round, and cannot  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 5 ft. Area: 5-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes By drawing on the power of the sun, you cause your body to emanate ﬁre. Fire extends 5 feet in all directions from your body, illuminating the area and dealing 1d4 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d4). Adjacent creatures take ﬁre damage each round on your turn.  BODY OF WAR  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Throwingbackyourarmsasyoucomplete the spell, you feel your body grow heavy andunresponsive.Amomentofpanicgrips you as your chest ceases to expand and you realize you are no longer breathing. Cold sweepsoveryourbodyasyouglancedown at your now-metallic ﬂesh. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a warforged titan (Eberron Campaign Setting 302). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to construct, and your size changes to Huge. You have the space and reach of a warforged titan (15 feet/15 feet). Your mindset changes so that you relish combat and cannot cast  CHAPTER 1  You sprout daggerlike blades from all the surfaces of your body and clothing. The blades appear metallic but are not actually metal, and never harm you or interfere with your movement or actions. You are proﬁcient with your blades, and they allow you to deal piercing damage equal to 1d6 + your caster level (maximum 1d6+5) with a successful grapple attack. You can also make a regular melee attack (or offhand attack) with the spikes, and they count as a light weapon in this case. If a creature initiates a grapple with you, it takes the same damage, and you gain a bonus on grapple checks to resist the grapple equal to the damage dealt. You get a +4 bonus on Escape Artist checks to escape from a net, rope, grappler, or spell that entangles.  BODY OF THE SUN  spells, even from magic items. You gain the Strength and Dexterity of an average warforged titan (Str 28, Dex 8), but you retain your own mental ability scores. You have no Constitution score while affected by this spell. Your base land speed becomes 50 feet. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You also gain low-light vision. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any extraordinary special abilities of your own form, as well as spell-like and supernatural abilities. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You cannot speak or cast spells while in warforged titan form. Your natural armor bonus becomes +18, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form, and you gain damage reduction 10/adamantine. As a construct, you have the following qualities: immunity to all mind-affecting spells and abilities, poison, sleep effects, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromancy effects, critical hits, nonlethal damage, ability drain, fatigue, exhaustion, energy drain, and to any effect that requires a Fortitude save (unless the effect also works on objects or is harmless). You also gain the warforged titan’s two attack forms (axe and maul), along with the trample special ability (damage 1d8+13; Reﬂex DC 25 half). The warforged titan’s axe deals 2d8 points of slashing damage and has a ×3 critical modiﬁer; its maul (essentially a huge warhammer) deals 2d8 points of bludgeoning damage and also has a ×3 critical modiﬁer. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Material Component: A miniature bronze hammer.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You ﬁnish the spell’s casting and shudder as slender, sharp-tipped spikes erupt from your body, limbs, and clothing.  damage any one ability score more than once every 5 rounds. The creature can attempt a Will saving throw each round to negate that round’s effect. While the subject is under the effect of body harmonic, its body whines and hums discordantly. The victim takes a –20 penalty on Move Silently checks. Focus: A crystal water-ﬁlled goblet worth at least 500 gp.  BOLT OF GLORY  Evocation [Good] Level: Cleric 6, Glory 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  35  The body of war spell turns any sorcerer or wizard into a potent combatant  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck takes varying damage, depending on its nature or its home plane of existence and your level. Creatures native to the Negative Energy Plane, evil-aligned outsiders, and all undead creatures take 1d12 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d12). Creatures native to the Material Plane or an Elemental Plane, or any other neutral-aligned outsiders, take 1d12 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 7d12). Creatures native to the Positive Energy Plane and all good-aligned outsiders are not affected by this spell.  You designate the spot on which the cylinder is centered. Each creature in the area that fails a Reﬂex saving throw takes 1d8 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d8) and is buried under 5 feet of rubble. A successful save halves the damage and avoids burial. A buried creature can free itself with a DC 20 Strength check (a full-round action), or it can be dug free by others (a single creature working alone requires 1 minute to free a trapped creature). A buried creature is unable to move, and cannot cast spells with somatic components, and any material components must be in hand. After this spell is cast, its area is covered in 5 feet of dense rubble (DMG 90) Focus: A quartz crystal embedded in rock.  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 5, Madness 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes With a strangled peal of laughter to complete the spell, you point your hand at your enemy and ﬁre a black beam from your ﬁnger. This spell grants you the ability to make one ray attack per round. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A living creature struck by the ray is dazed for 1d3 rounds if it fails its save.  BOMBARDMENT  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (15-ft. radius, 40 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: No  BONEFIDDLE  Necromancy Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature with a skeleton or exoskeleton Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You rub your middle ﬁnger across your thumb like a bow against a ﬁddle while simultaneously humming a discordant tune under your breath. Nearby, you see a translucent bone-white ﬁddle bow appear and sink into the ﬂesh of your target. It begins sawing, as if playing your target like a ﬁddle. You call up a ghostly ﬁddle bow in the air above the targeted creature. This bow immediately descends into the target body and begins to saw back and forth against its skeleton. Although the music produced is eerily beautiful, it causes intense pain and anguish in the victim. Each round on its turn, the victim must make a Fortitude save or take 3d6 points of sonic damage and a –20 penalty on Move Silently checks. A successful save negates the damage  BOTTLE OF SMOKE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Effect: One smoky, horselike creature Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youwaveanornatebottleaboutandsmoke twists into it, ﬁlling it with a white cloud. You create a plume of smoke that you capture in a special bottle you’re holding. If the bottle is thereafter opened before the spell duration expires, the smoke emerges to form a vaguely horselike creature made of wisps of smoke. It makes no sound, and anything that touches it simply passes through it. To mount this smoke horse, the would-be rider must make a DC 10 Ride check while holding the bottle in one hand. Anyone attempting to mount without the bottle simply passes through the horse’s form. Letting go of the bottle after mounting causes the rider to fall through the horse’s smoky form; he or she cannot thereafter remount without the intact bottle in hand. If the bottle is broken, the spell ends immediately and the rider (if mounted) falls to the ground. The smoke horse has a speed of 20 feet per caster level, to a maximum of 240 feet. It can send smoke billowing out behind it at the rider’s behest, leaving behind a bank of smoke 5 feet wide and 20 feet high as it moves. A severe wind, or magical wind of any kind, disperses the horse (and any smoke it has produced) instantly. Otherwise, the bank of smoke lasts 10 minutes, starting on the turn it was laid down. Starting or stopping the smoke trail is a free action. The mount and the smoke trail it produces give concealment to anyone behind them. The mount is immune to all damage and other attacks because material  Illus. by W. Reynolds  BOLTS OF BEDEVILMENT  and ends the spell. The spell’s effects continue even if the subject moves so that you no longer have line of sight or line of effect to it. Focus: A miniature silver ﬁddle worth at least 30 gp.  CHAPTER 1  You point to the empty air and boulders tumble into being, burying your opponents.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CallinguponthePositiveEnergyPlaneand the power of your faith, you project a white bolt of hissing positive energy at your foe.  37  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  objects and spells simply pass through it. It cannot attack. The rider can return the smoke horse to the bottle, and thus pause the spell, at any time by simply uncorking it (a move action) and stoppering it again (another move action) in the next round after the horse is inside. If the bottle is reopened later, the spell reactivates with its remaining duration intact. Regardless of how much duration remains unused, the spell ceases functioning 24 hours after it is cast. If dispelled at any time while the bottle is corked, the spell ends. Focus: An ornate, corked bottle worth at least 50 gp.  Branch to branch allows a druid or ranger to swing through the trees like a monkey  Illus. by J. Nelson  BRAIN SPIDER  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 7, Mind 7 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Targets: Up to eight living creatures Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You touch a spider’s body and think of the targets. As each target succumbs to the spell, a leg of the spider vanishes into nothingness. For the duration of the spell, as a standard action, you can eavesdrop on the thoughts of up to eight other creatures at once, hearing as desired: • A creature’s surface thoughts. • Individual trains of thought in whatever order you desire. • One nugget of information per caster level from all the minds regarding one particular topic, thing, or being. • The thoughts and memories of one creature of the group in detail.  Once per round, if you do not perform a detailed study of one creature’s mind, you can attempt (as a standard action) to implant a suggestion (PH 285) in the mind of any one of the affected creatures. The creature can make another Will saving throw to resist the suggestion, using the original save DC. (Creatures with special resistance to enchantment spells can  38  use this resistance to keep from being affected by the suggestion.) Success on this saving throw does not negate the other effects of the brain spider for that creature. Material Component: A dead spider of any size or type. It must still have all eight legs.  BRAMBLES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Wooden weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With the sound of twisting wood, the weapon you touch grows sharp spikes like rose thorns. For the duration of the spell, the weapon deals both piercing and bludgeoning damage. It gains a +1 enhancement bonus on its attacks and also gains a +1 enhancement bonus per caster level on melee damage rolls (maximum +10). This spell works only on melee weapons with wooden striking surfaces. For instance, it does not work on a bow, an arrow, or a metal mace. Material Component: A small thorn.  BRANCH TO BRANCH Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  With the last guttural utterance, your ﬁngers thicken and your arms lengthen slightly. You have the impression that you would feel more at ease in a canopy of trees. You gain a +10 competence bonus on Climb checks made in trees. As long as you remain at least 10 feet above the ground, you can brachiate (swing by branches and vines) in medium or dense forest, but not in sparse forest. When you brachiate, you gain a 10-foot enhancement bonus to your land speed and ignore the hampered movement penalties for undergrowth and other terrain features. You can charge while brachiating, but you can’t run. Naturally, some local conditions, such as areas of sparse forest, clearings, wide rivers, or other breaks in the forest canopy, might force you to return to the ground.  BREATH FLARE  Transmutation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1  Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round You exhale your breath weapon, and it ﬂashes brilliantly, surprising your foes.  Transmutation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Mist spreads in a 40-ft. radius, 20 ft. high Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a word of power and ﬂick of your wrist, a foul-smelling, ﬁne mist appears. The DC of any saving throw made within the mist against poison or disease increases by 2. The mist does not provide concealment.  BREATH WEAPON ADMIXTURE  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round You spit out two forms of energy as your breath weapon streaks toward your opponents.  BREATH WEAPON SUBSTITUTION  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round Your foes, prepared for your terrible ﬁery breath weapon, are caught off guard as you exhale a cone of caustic acid in their surprised faces. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you choose one type of energy other than that normally associated with your breath weapon: acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre. You can modify your breath weapon to use the selected energy type instead of its normal energy type. For example, an old red dragon whose breath weapon normally deals 16d10 points of ﬁre damage could use this spell to produce a cone dealing 16d10 points of acid damage instead.  BRIAR WEB  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  BREATH OF THE JUNGLE  When you use this spell to produce acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre energy, it is a spell of that type. For example, breath weapon substitution is an acid spell when you cast it to change your breath weapon to deal acid damage.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon that uses ﬁre or electricity, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, your breath weapon is suffused with bright light. In addition to taking the normal ﬁre or electricity damage, creatures that fail their saving throws against the breath weapon are dazzled for 1 minute per caster level. Sightless creatures are not affected by breath ﬂare.  For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you choose one type of energy other than that normally associated with your breath weapon: acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic. You can modify your breath weapon to add an equal amount of the energy you choose. For example, a great wyrm red dragon whose breath weapon normally deals 24d10 points of ﬁre damage could use this spell to produce a cone dealing 24d10 points of ﬁre damage and 24d10 points of acid damage. Even opposed types of energy, such as ﬁre and cold, can be combined using this spell. If you choose sonic energy, the save DC of your breath weapon is reduced by 2. When you use this spell to produce acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre energy, it is a spell of that type. For example, breath weapon admixture is an acid spell when you cast it to add acid damage to your breath weapon.  With a sound like a thousand knives being unsheathed, the plants in the area grow sharp thorns and warp into a thick briar patch. This spell causes grasses, weeds, bushes, and even trees to grow thorns and wrap and twist around creatures in or entering the area. The spell’s area becomes difﬁcult terrain, and creatures move at half speed within the affected area. Any creature moving through the area also takes 1 point of nonmagical piercing damage for each 5 feet moved. A creature with freedom of movement or the woodland stride ability is unaffected by this spell.  BRILLIANT AURA  Transmutation Level: Cleric 8, druid 8, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Targets: Weapons carried by one creature/2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Takingfreshinsightfromcontemplationof light, you cast the spell and set your allies aglow with white brilliance. This spell functions like brilliant blade (see below), except as noted here, and that all weapons of the subject creatures gain the brilliant energy special ability.  39  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  BRILLIANT BLADE  Transmutation Level: Cleric 7, druid 7, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One melee or thrown weapon, or ﬁfty projectiles (all of which must be in contact with each other at the time of casting) Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object)  The bristle spell temporarily enhances one suit of armor, causing it to grow long hard spikes that stick out in all directions. This spell does not work on clothing other than armor, but it does function  You transform a single melee weapon, natural weapon, thrown weapon, or group of projectiles into a weapon with the brilliant energy special ability (DMG 224). If this spell is cast on arrows or crossbow bolts, the effect on a particular projectile ends after one use, whether or not the missile strikes its intended target. Treat shuriken as arrows, rather than as thrown weapons, for the purpose of this spell.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Suit of armor touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a word and the sudden opening of yourhandyoucompletethespell.Touching  Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One willing creature/ level, no two of which are more than 20 ft. apart Duration: 1 minute/ level (D); see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a sharp jab of your ﬁnger, the water around your indicated subjects begins to push them toward the surface. The subjects of this spell are borne toward the surface at 60 feet per round until they are ﬂoating on it. The subject then rests at the top of the liquid (rescuing it from drowning if it was a sinking air-breather) and can swim away under its own power or be moved by others (such as with a rope). If the subject is removed from the liquid, the spell ends.  With a word, the indicated weapon glows with a soft bluewhite halo that emits a low, slowly pulsating hum. The faint smell of ozone permeates the air.  BRISTLE  40  asuitofarmorinstantlycausesthearmorto sprout long, deadly-looking spines.  BURNING BLOOD  Briar web wraps creatures in the thorny grip of nearby plants  with armor that already has spikes built in. The spikes are ﬂexible enough not to hamper the creature wearing the armor. Each round, the ﬁrst time the armor wearer attacks a target in melee, the spikes strike out as well, growing in length and hardness. The spikes have an attack bonus equal to your caster level and deal 2d6 points of damage. Your Strength modiﬁer does not apply to this damage.  BUOYANT LIFTING Evocation Level: Druid 1  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature; see text Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes The taste of copper ﬁlls your mouth and bloodyspatterspunctuatethelastfewwords thatunlockthespell.Yougagslightlyasthe blood in your mouth congeals, but disappears even as you release the spell. You taint a living creature’s blood with a hot, corrosive infusion, dealing 1d8 points of acid damage and 1d8 points of ﬁre damage per round. The subject  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By chopping your hand like an axe and utteringthelastfewphrasesofthespell,you causetheweaponyou’vetouchedtobecome wreathed in ﬂickering blue ﬂames. The ﬂames from this spell shed azure light out to 30 feet. These ﬂames do not harm the weapon or its wielder, but for the duration of the spell, it delivers ﬁre damage in addition to its normal damage. The enchanted weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of ﬁre damage on a successful hit. Also, on a critical hit, the weapon deals additional ﬁre damage based on the weapon’s critical multiplier: Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  BURROW  Additional Fire Damage +1d10 +2d10 +3d10  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The subject can burrow through earth and loose rock (but not solid stone) with a speed of 30 feet (or 20 feet if it wears medium or heavy armor, or if it carries a medium or heavy load). Arcane Focus: A claw from a burrowing creature.  BURROW, MASS  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, ranger 3 Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart You call upon the power of the spell and, in turn, each of your allies’ hands gain a yellow nimbus, forming into the hands of large moles. This spell functions like burrow, except that it affects multiple creatures.  BUZZING BEE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No A small but extremely loud bee appears, buzzing around the head of the designated target. This spell creates an unnerving noise that disrupts the subject’s concentration. The subject is distracted and takes a –10 penalty on Move Silently checks. Creatures that can’t hear are not distracted. The DC of Concentration checks to cast spells or maintain concentration while distracted is equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast. The bee has a ﬂy speed of 180 feet (perfect). It remains near the subject in spite of darkness, invisibility, polymorph, cover, concealment, or any other attempt at disguising or hiding. The bee remains until the spell’s dura-  tion expires or the subject moves out of range. The bee can’t be attacked, but it can be dispelled. Material Component: A dab of honey.  CACOPHONIC BURST  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  BURNING SWORD  You invoke the spell and your hands glow with a yellow aura, the aura lengthening and forming into translucent mole hands. The smell of freshly turned earth ﬁlls the air.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  can attempt a Fortitude save each round to negate the damage, but a successful save does not prevent damage in future rounds. Searing pain limits the subject to a single move action in any round when it fails its Fortitude save. Burning blood does not affect creatures of the construct, elemental, ooze, plant, or undead types. Material Component: A drop of blood and a pinch of saltpeter.  You complete the spell with a scream, and echoesofyourcrytraveloutwardandburst into ear-shattering sounds. You cause a burst of low, discordant noise to erupt at the chosen location. It deals 1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to all creatures within the area. Cacophonic burst cannot penetrate the area of a silence spell.  CACOPHONIC SHIELD Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Your words speed into a jumble of sounds thatmixtogetheruntilonlyaconstant,faint buzzing sound remains. You create a barrier of sonic energy at a distance of 10 feet from yourself. Creatures on either side of the barrier hear it as a loud but harmless buzzing. Nonmagical sound (including sound produced by a thunderstone) does not cross the barrier. Supernatural or spell-based sounds or sonic effects penetrate the barrier only if the caster or originator of the effect succeeds on a caster level check (DC 11 + your caster level). A creature that crosses the barrier takes 1d6 points of sonic damage +1  41  Illus. by J. Nelson  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  point per caster level (maximum +20) and must make a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1 minute. The sonic vibrations create a 20% miss chance for any missiles (including siege weapon attacks) crossing the barrier in either direction. The barrier moves with you, but you cannot force another creature to pass through it (for example, by moving adjacent to an enemy). If you force a creature to pass through, the barrier has no effect on that creature.  You call across the boundaries of the multiverse, and the powers of Mechanus respond. The marut warps into place in an eyeblink with a whirling throb of thunder. “Whodenies death?”itaskswiththevoice of an avalanche.  CALL KOLYARUT  Conjuration (Calling) [Lawful] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One called kolyarut Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CALL MARUT  Conjuration (Calling) [Lawful] Level: Cleric 9, Mechanus 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)  Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One called zelekhut Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You make the necessary conjurations and the powers of Mechanus respond. The Zelekhut fades into view, its centaur form accompaniedbythesoundofrattlingsilver chains.“Whoseekstoescapejustice?” it asks with the solemn tones of a judge’s gavel. By casting this spell, you receive the aid of a zelekhut inevitable (MM 160). If you know an individual zelekhut’s name, you can request that individual by speaking the name during the spell (though you might get a different creature, anyway). You can ask the zelekhut to perform one duty for you. The task must take no more than 1 hour to complete. The inevitable does not ask for any payment for the task. XP Cost: 100 XP.  As you complete the spell, the powersofMechanusrespond.The kolyarutdoesnotmanifestbefore you as much as assembles itself in your presence, a single whirling cogunfoldinguntiltheconstructstands complete.“Whoistobepunished?”itasksin the ﬂat voice of a clock mechanism. By casting this spell, you receive the aid of a kolyarut inevitable (MM 159). If you know an individual kolyarut’s name, you can request that individual by speaking the name during the spell (though you might get a different creature, anyway). You can ask the kolyarut to perform one duty for you. The task must take no more than 1 hour to complete. The inevitable does not ask for any payment for the task. XP Cost: 250 XP.  42  Effect: One called marut Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CALTROPS A zelekhut only answers the call of a spellcaster who seeks justice  By casting this spell, you receive the aid of a marut inevitable (MM 159). If you know an individual marut’s name, you can request that individual by speaking the name during the spell (though you might get a different creature, anyway). You can ask the marut to perform one duty for you. The task must take no more than 1 hour to complete. The inevitable does not ask for any payment for the task. XP Cost: 500 XP.  CALL ZELEKHUT  Conjuration (Calling) [Lawful] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: See text Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youspeakthewordsandspreadyourpalm open,asifyouwerethrowingjacks.Coppery sparks spring from your palm, ﬁlling the corridor with small four-pronged spikes. A caltrops spell covers one 5-foot-by-5foot square with caltrops. Every time a creature moves into an area covered by caltrops or spends a round ﬁghting while standing in such an area, it might step on one. The caltrops make one attack roll (+0 melee) against the creature. For this attack, the target’s  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level Upon ﬁnishing the spell, your skin and clothingchangecolor,warpingtintandhue to match your surroundings. Throughout the duration of the spell, your coloration changes instantly to match the background of any new environment you enter, with no effort on your part. This effect grants you a +10 circumstance bonus on Hide checks.  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: Any number of creatures, no two of which are more than 60 ft. apart Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Reaching out to your environment, you wrap your allies in the patterns and shiftingcolorsoftheirsurroundings,concealing them from prying eyes. This spell functions like camouﬂage, except the effect is mobile with the group. The spell is broken for any individual who moves more than 60 feet from the nearest member of the group. (If only two individuals are affected, the one moving away from the other one loses its camouﬂage. If both are moving away from each other, they both become visible when the distance between them exceeds 60 feet.)  CAPRICIOUS ZEPHYR  Evocation [Air] Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 5-ft.-diameter sphere Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None or Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Blowing on your twirling hand, you completethespell,creatingaroilingballofdust and gale-force winds. A ball of swirling wind and dust moves as you direct it, pushing your foes across the battleﬁeld. From its starting point, a capricious zephyr moves 30 feet per round in the direction you point, regardless of the presence or absence of terrain. If the sphere enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for that round and tries to bowl over the creature with its wind force. That creature must resist a bull rush attack from the capricious zephyr, which has a +6 bonus on the check. If the spell wins the bull rush, it pushes the creature as far as it can in a  random direction (roll 1d8; 1 indicates a push into the square closest to you, and 2 through 8 indicate the other squares, moving clockwise around the creature). Any creature pushed by the sphere must succeed on a Reﬂex save or fall prone. A capricious zephyr moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action for you). Otherwise, it merely stays at rest and attempts to bowl over anyone in its square. The spell ends if the distance between the sphere and you ever exceeds the spell’s range.  CAST IN STONE  Transmutation Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None and Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  CAMOUFLAGE  CAMOUFLAGE, MASS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  shield and deﬂection bonuses do not count, nor does its armor bonus for armor worn. A target wearing shoes or other footwear gains a +2 armor bonus to Armor Class (which does count). If the caltrops succeed on the attack, the creature has stepped on one. A successful attack by a caltrop deals 1 point of damage. If the target is Small, Medium, or Large, its land speed is reduced by one-half because of the injury. This movement penalty lasts for 24 hours, until the creature is successfully treated with a DC 15 Heal check, or until it receives at least 1 point of magical healing. A charging or running creature must immediately stop if it steps on a caltrop. Any creature moving at half speed or slower can pick its way through a bed of caltrops with no trouble. The DM judges the effectiveness of caltrops against unusual opponents or opponents outside the size range given above. A giant centipede, for example, can scramble among the caltrops with no chance of hurting itself, and a ﬁre giant wearing thick, massive boots might be immune to their attacks. For every two caster levels beyond 1st, you can affect an additional 5-footby-5-foot square, and the caltrops’ attack bonus increases by 1. Thus, you affect two squares at 3rd level (+1 melee), three at 5th level (+2 melee), four at 7th level (+3 melee), and a maximum of ﬁve at 9th level or higher (+4 melee maximum). Multiple caltrops spells (or mundane caltrops) occupying the same space have no additional effect.  Youreyesbecomelikegraystoneorbstraced with golden veins. The change catches the foesﬁghtingyoubysurprise,andtheyturn to stone. Any creature within 30 feet that meets your gaze is permanently turned into a mindless, inert statue (as ﬂesh to stone), unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save. You can free the victim of your own cast in stone at any time by speaking a command word you establish during the casting. Each creature within range of the gaze must attempt a saving throw against the gaze effect each round at the beginning of its turn. A creature can avert its eyes, which grants a 50% chance to avoid the gaze but in turn grants you concealment relative to it. A creature can close its eyes or turn away entirely; doing so prevents the gaze from affecting it but grants you total concealment from that creature. In addition, you can actively attempt to use the gaze as a standard action each round. To do so, you choose a target within range, and that target must attempt a saving throw. A target that is averting or shutting its eyes gains the above beneﬁts.  43  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Chain missile puts magic missile to shame  CASTIGATE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Cleric 4, paladin 4, Puriﬁcation 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Shoutingyourdeity’steachings,yourebuke your foes with the magic of your sacred words. This spell has no effect on creatures that cannot hear. All creatures whose alignment differs from yours on both the law–chaos and the good–evil axes take 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d4). All creatures whose alignment differs from yours on one component take half damage, and this spell does not deal damage to those who share your alignment.  44  For example, a lawful good cleric who casts this spell deals full damage to any creature that is not lawful and not good, half damage to any creature that is lawful or good (but not both), and no damage to lawful good creatures. A Fortitude saving throw reduces damage by half.  CELEBRATION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [MindAffecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: All creatures in a 15-ft.radius burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a few slurred words and fumbling motions,youcompletethespellandprepare to perform.  You cause any creatures in the area to feel increasingly more intoxicated the longer you perform a drinking song. In the round this spell is cast, all creatures that fail their saving throws take a –2 penalty to Dexterity, Intelligence, and Wisdom. If you use a standard action to continue performing in a second consecutive round, each affected creature must succeed on a second Will saving throw or become nauseated. Succeeding on this saving throw prevents the nausea, and the creature is immune to further effects of this spell. If you use a standard action to continue performing in a third consecutive round, any affected creatures must succeed on a Will save or pass out, becoming unconscious and helpless.  CHAIN MISSILE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)  Target: One creature, plus one more creature/2 levels (each of which must be within 30 ft. of the primary target) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  You can use another creature’s vision instead of your own. While this spell gives you no control over the subject, each time it comes into physical contact with another living being, you can choose to transfer your sensor to the new creature. During your turn in a round, you can use a free action to switch from seeing through the current creature’s eyes to seeing normally or back again. Each transfer attempt allows the new target a saving throw and spell resistance. If a target resists, the spell ends.  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes  Holdingyourhandtoyourhead—indexand middle ﬁngers extended in a V—you call upontheancientpowerofthetriceratops.You touch your intended target,  CHAPTER 1  With the creature’s will to resist brushed aside,yougazeoutfromitseyestoseeyour own satisﬁed smile.  CHARGE OF THE TRICERATOPS  Illus. by J. Nelson  Missiles of magical energy dart from your ﬁngertip to unerringly strike a creature. The missiles strike one creature initially, then spring to other targets. Each missile deals 1d4+1 points of force damage. One missile strikes the primary target per two caster levels, to a maximum of ten missiles (dealing 10d4+10 points of damage). After the missiles strike, they ricochet to a number of targets up to the number of missiles created by the spell. Each secondary target takes 1d4+1 points of damage, as if struck by a single magic missile. You choose secondary targets as you like, but they must all be within 30 feet of the primary target, and no secondary target can be struck more than once. You can choose to affect fewer secondary targets than the maximum (to avoid allies in the area, for example). Missiles without a secondary target do not ricochet off the primary target. Spells, magic items, and abilities that protect against magic missile (such as the shield spell or a brooch of shielding) also protect against this spell. If the primary target has that sort of protection, the spell has no effect against it but still springs to all secondary targets. (A brooch of shielding loses a number of charges equal to the number of missiles hitting the creature—up to ten missiles.) If spell resistance causes the spell to fail to harm the primary target, the spell fails and missiles do not ricochet to additional targets. The missiles strike unerringly, even if the targets are in melee or have anything less then total cover or concealment. You cannot single out speciﬁc parts of a creature to strike. This spell cannot target or damage inanimate objects.  Divination Level: Cleric 3, druid 4, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Bolts of pale blue energy spring forth from your ﬁnger and slam into the desired target. An instant later, the bolts bounce away toward other creatures, slamming into each one.  CHAIN OF EYES  A druid can cast charge of the triceratops on herself, an ally, or an animal companion  45  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  which then grows large horns, a bony skull plate, and a thickened hide. The horns created by this spell grant a natural gore attack that deals 1d8 points of damage (1d6 points of damage if the subject creature is Small, 2d6 if Large). If the gore attack is used as part of a charge, it deals double damage. If the gore attack is used as a primary weapon, the subject adds 1-1/2 times its Strength bonus to the damage of the attack. If it is used as a secondary weapon, the subject adds only 1/2 its Strength bonus to the damage roll, and takes a –5 penalty on the attack roll. The recipient also gains a +4 enhancement bonus to its natural armor.  CHEAT  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, Greed 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: No You rattle the dice in your hand and mutter the words of the spell, then check your facedown cards again. The two low cards have somehow become trumps. At one point during the duration of this spell, you can attempt to alter the outcome of a game of chance. This spell can affect only nonmagical games, such as those using cards or dice. It cannot affect a game involving magic, nor a magic item involved in a game of chance (such as a deck of many things). Whenever a dice roll is made to determine the outcome of the game, a character under the effect of this spell can demand a reroll and take the better of the two rolls. Anyone observing the game of chance is allowed a Will saving throw to realize something ﬁshy is going on, and might suspect that the outcome of the game has been magically altered. For example, Darkon is playing a game that he has a 1 in 4 chance of winning. The DM secretly rolls 1d4  46  and tells the player that Darkon lost. Because Darkon is under the effect of a cheat spell, the player can have the DM reroll. The spell alters probability, so there is no subterfuge that another character could notice (except for the casting of the spell itself). Focus: A pair of dice made from human bones.  CHECKMATE’S LIGHT Evocation [Lawful] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Melee weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You intone your deity’s name and the weapon you touch hums a harmonic response before it lights up with a soothing red glow. You imbue the touched weapon with a +1 enhancement bonus per three caster levels (maximum +5 at 15th level), and it is treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. In addition, you can cause it to cast a red glow as bright as a torch. Any creature within the radius of its clear illumination (20 feet) gets a +1 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects. If the weapon leaves your grasp, the spell effect is suppressed until you or another worshiper of your deity picks it up. Time that passes while the spell’s effects are suppressed counts against the spell’s duration.  CHILL OF THE GRAVE  Necromancy Level: Deathbound 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Apalerayeruptsfromyourpointingﬁnger, and a moaning sound ﬁlls the air as it streaks toward your target.  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The subject takes 1d10 points of cold damage. This damage increases to 2d10 at caster level 4th, 3d10 at caster level 7th, and 4d10 at caster level 10th.  CIRCLE DANCE  Divination Level: Bard 2, cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Youdancetoeachpointofthecompassrose, then ﬁnish the spell in a wide, circular sweep. At the end, you know that the creature you seek lies in the direction you face. You divine the relative direction and condition of another creature. You must have ﬁrsthand knowledge of the creature for the spell to function. If the creature is alive and on the same plane as you, the spell leaves you facing in its direction. You also get an impression of its physical and emotional condition (unharmed, w o u n d e d , unconscious, dying, and so on). If the creature you seek is on a different plane or dead, you feel nothing.  CLARITY OF MIND  Abjuration Level: Balance 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A nimbus of silver rays surrounds the warrior’sheadasyoutouchhimandinvoke the spell’s holy power. His thoughts grow clearer, and he is better able to see through the mind-warping effects of spells. You grant the subject a +4 insight bonus on saving throws against all mind-affecting spells and effects. If the subject of clarity of mind attacks a creature that has concealment and fails  the miss chance roll, he can reroll the miss chance once to see if his attack actually hit the target.  Asilverglowsheathesyourbody asyoucompletethespell.Asthe glowfades,youfeelatouchofthe divine at the back of your mind. This divine touch spreads until youfeelyourconcernsandanxieties fade away.  CLAWS OF THE BEAR  CLAWS OF DARKNESS Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes; see text  You draw material from the Plane of Shadow to cause your hands and forearms toelongateandchangeshapeintofeatureless claws of inky blackness.  The climb walls spell helps make treacherous ascents simple work  When you cast this spell, your hands become shadowy claws. Starting on your next action, you can use the claws to make unarmed attacks as if they were natural weapons. (You attack with one claw and can use the other claw for an off-hand attack. If you have multiple attacks, you use them normally when attacking with the claws.) Attacks with the claws are melee touch attacks. Each claw deals 1d8 points of cold damage. If you grapple an opponent, you deal claw damage with each successful grapple check, and the grappled target is under the effect of a slow spell for as long as you maintain the grapple. An opponent that makes a successful Fortitude save is not slowed, and it cannot be slowed by this casting of claws of darkness. You can extend the claws up to 6 feet, which gives you a natural reach of 10 feet, or retract them as a free action. When the spell is in effect, you cannot cast spells with components other than verbal ones, nor can you carry items with your hands. Any magic items worn on your hands are temporarily absorbed and cease functioning while the spell is active.  CLEAR MIND  Abjuration Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You brush the target with your ﬁnger, and shenowperceiveshandholdsandtoeholds where others see smooth stone. The subject gains a +10 enhancement bonus on Climb checks. The bonus increases to +20 at caster level 5th, and to +30 (the maximum) at caster level 9th. Unlike with spider climb, this spell does not allow the subject to climb on ceilings, and it does not give the creature a climb speed. Material Component: A drop of tree sap or equally sticky material.  Illus. by M. Cotie  When you cast this spell, your hands become natural weapons that deal 1d8 points of damage each or your normal unarmed damage, whichever is greater. You are considered armed while this spell is in effect. If you are Small, your claws deal 1d6 points of damage, and if you are Large, they deal 2d6 points of damage. You add your Strength modiﬁer to your claw damage rolls. Your claws work just like the natural weapons of many monsters. You can make an attack with one claw or a full attack with two claws at your normal attack bonus, replacing your normal attack routine. You take no penalties for two-weapon ﬁghting, and neither attack is a secondary attack. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks—you simply have two claw attacks at your normal attack bonus.  CLIMB WALLS  CHAPTER 1  Howling a curse at your enemies, pain explodes in your hands as they suddenly sportlongclaws.Almostinstantlythepain fades.Toobadyourfoeswon’tbeabletosay the same.  You gain a +4 sacred bonus on saving throws made against mind-affecting spells and effects.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  CLOAK OF BRAVERY  Abjuration [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 3, Courage 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: 60-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Summoningupyourcourage,youthrowout your arm and sweep it over the area, cloaking all your allies in a glittering mantle of magic that bolsters their bravery.  47  All allies within the emanation (including you) gain a morale bonus on saves against fear effects equal to your caster level (to a maximum of +10 at caster level 10th).  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  CLOAK OF BRAVERY, GREATER Abjuration [Mind-Affecting] Level: Courage 9 Range: 1 mile; see text Area: 1-mile-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 hour/level  This spell functions like cloak of bravery, except all allies within the emanation (including you) are immune to fear effects and gain a +2 morale bonus on attack rolls. Allies who don’t have line of sight to you are unaffected.  CLOAK OF DARK POWER  Abjuration Level: Drow 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A dim gray haze appears around the creature. Light bends around this haze, leaving the creature in a patch of strange and shifting darkness. Cloak of dark power creates a dusky haze around the subject. The haze does not interfere with vision, but the subject and anything it wears or carries is protected from the effects of full sunlight, even under the open, daytime sky of the surface world. A drow subject suffers no blindness or bright illumination combat penalties while under the effect of cloak of dark power. The subject also gains a +4 resistance bonus on saves against light or darkness spells or effects.  CLOAK OF THE SEA  Transmutation Level: Druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 6  48  Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Ablue-greenglowsurroundsyourhandas you complete the spell. With a touch you release it into your intended target, which then turns the same shade of blue-green. While underwater, the subject functions as if affected by blur (PH 206), freedomofmovement(PH233),andwater breathing (PH 300), and doesn’t take nonlethal damage for the duration of the spell. When out of the water (or even partially out), the subject gains none of these advantages except water breathing. The subject can leave and reenter water without ending the spell.  CLOAK POOL  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One color pool Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: No Afewwordsandmotions,andtheswirling colorpoolbecomesassilver-grayastherest of the Astral Plane. This spell causes a color pool on the Astral Plane (DMG 154)—an irregular patch of color containing a portal to another plane—to seemingly cease to exist. In truth, the color pool is only hidden from view. The use of this spell does not hide the area around the pool; it masks only the fact that a pool is present. See invisibility or true seeing reveals the presence of the pool, as does analyze portal.  CLOSE WOUNDS  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourallyfallsfromacrushingblow,butyou don’t have time to reach him. You quickly speak words of power, and the worst of his injuries glow golden and begin to heal. This spell cures 1d4 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +5). If you cast this spell immediately after the subject takes damage, it effectively prevents the damage. It would keep alive someone who had just dropped to –10 hit points, for example, leaving the character at negative hit points but stable. Used against an undead creature, close wounds deals damage instead of curing the creature (which takes half damage if it makes a Will saving throw).  CLOUD OF BEWILDERMENT  Conjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 10-ft. cube Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No Asyouexhalethelastsyllablesoftheincantation,yourbreathformsaninvisiblespray of noxious air. This spell creates a small cloud of nauseating vapors. Any living creature in the area becomes nauseated. This condition lasts as long as the creature is in the cloud and for 1d4+1 rounds after it leaves. Any creature that succeeds on its save but remains in the cloud must continue to save each round on your turn. The cloud obscures sight, including darkvision, providing concealment to creatures within the area or against attacks made through the cloud. Material Component: A rotten egg.  CLOUD WINGS  This spell increases the subject’s ﬂy speed by 30 feet. It has no effect on other modes of movement, nor does it allow the subject to ﬂy if it cannot already do so.  CLOUDBURST  Clouds whirl into existence and, with a peal of thunder, let loose a drenching downpour.  CLUTCH OF ORCUS  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One humanoid Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Reaching out a hand twisted by tension into a grasping claw, you squeeze your foe’s heart from afar, anticipating the moment its smoking remains will rest in your palm. Magical force grips the subject’s heart (or similar vital organ) and begins crushing it. The victim is paralyzed and takes 1d12 points of damage per round. Concentration is required to maintain the spell each round. A conscious victim can attempt a new Fortitude saving throw each round to end the spell. If the victim dies as a result of this spell, its smoking heart appears in your hand.  Illus. by R. Spears  Evocation [Water] Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 100-ft.-radius emanation Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Transmutation Level: Druid 7, Windstorm 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  CHAPTER 1  As you touch the subject, mist forms crude wings that cling to his back.  CLOUD-WALKERS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  COCOON  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 8 The cloud wings spell gives great speed to a ﬂying creature Components: V, S, M, You cause clouds to gather and XP a heavy rain to fall. The rain reduces Withakissblowntoeachsubject,youcreate Casting Time: 1 round visibility ranges by half, resulting in a gaseous pads of cloudstuff on their feet, Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) –4 penalty on Spot and Search checks. allowing them to walk on the clouds. Target: One corpse It automatically extinguishes unproDuration: Instantaneous Each subject of the spell can move tected ﬂames and has a 50% chance Saving Throw: Fortitude negates with a ﬂy speed of 60 feet (perfect of extinguishing protected ﬂames. Spell Resistance: Yes maneuverability), but only outdoors. Ranged weapon attacks and Listen checks take a –4 penalty. Fire damage To touch the earth again, a subject must Thesilkwormcocoondisappearsfromyour in this spell’s area is reduced by 1 point use a standard action to shake off the palm,andsilkthreadscoalescefromthinair per die of damage. cloudstuff, which ends the spell for that aroundyourtarget,quicklywrappingabout This spell does not function indoors, the body until it is fully encased. creature. You can dismiss the spell, but underground, underwater, or in desert only for all subjects at once—an act climates. After the spell ends, the water that can have signiﬁcant consequences When cast upon a deceased creature created evaporates over the next 10 for subjects already in the air. (whose death can be no less recent than 1 round per caster level), this spell minutes. The water created with this preserves the body and begins a slow spell does not slake thirst or provide process of rebirth. If the corpse is raised, any nourishment to plants.  49  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  resurrected, or reincarnated at any point during the next week, the creature takes no level loss or Constitution loss normally associated with such spells. At the conclusion of the week, if the subject has not been returned to life, the creature is automatically reincarnated, as the spell, with no loss of level or Constitution. Material Component: A silkworm cocoon. XP Cost: 250 XP  COLD FIRE  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One ﬁre source (up to a 20-ft. cube) or one creature; see text Duration: 1 minute/level (D) (ﬁre source) or Instantaneous (creature) Saving Throw: No (ﬁre source) or Fortitude half (creature) Spell Resistance: No (ﬁre source) or Yes (creature) As you complete the spell you widen your eyes slightly at the ﬁre you wish to affect. Its ﬂames instantly turn a blue-white. The air between you and the ﬁre feels much colder. You are able to change the normal ﬂames of a ﬁre (any blaze that lasts for more than 1 round) into cold ﬂames. Affected ﬂames deal cold damage to creatures that come into contact with them. The spell can also affect magical ﬁres such as those generated by a wall of ﬁre, provided the affected ﬁre is small enough. Cold ﬁre ﬂames burn blue and white for the duration of the spell. If the target is a creature with the ﬁre subtype or vulnerability to cold, the spell deals 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to the creature, but has no further effect.  COLD SNAP  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 6, druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 1 mile  50  Area: 1-mile-radius circle centered on you Duration: 2d4 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you call upon divine power to fuel your spell, you feel the air around you become chilled. The drop in temperature creates a thin fog that exacerbates the cold in the air without hindering your vision or movement whatsoever. This spell causes a powerful cold front to form, lowering the temperature in the affected area by 5 degrees Fahrenheit per caster level (maximum change of 50 degrees Fahrenheit), to a maximum low of –20 degrees Fahrenheit (see Cold Dangers, DMG 302). Spells with the cold descriptor deal an extra 1 point of damage per die when cast in the area.  COMBUST  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Touched creature or combustible object that weighs no more than 25 lb./level Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: Yes You rub the oil against the ﬂint and murmur the ancient words, touching your target. It immediately smolders and then bursts into bright ﬂames. This spell makes a combustible object or a creature’s combustible equipment burst into ﬂame, even if damp. If the target is a creature, the initial eruption of ﬂame causes 1d8 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d8) with no saving throw. Further, the creature must make a DC 15 Reﬂex save or catch ﬁre (DMG 303). If the target is a combustible, unattended object, the initial eruption of ﬂame deals ﬁre damage to the object as noted above. The object catches ﬁre and takes 1d6 points of ﬁre damage each round until consumed or someone puts out the ﬁre. Material Component: A drop of oil and a piece of ﬂint.  COMETFALL  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 6, druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 400-pound ball of rock and ice Area: 5-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No Youconjureabright,glowingcomet,which appearsinmidairaboveyourenemies,then strikes the ground with tremendous force and a thunderous boom. You conjure a comet that immediately falls to the ground, dealing 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to everything in the area. The force of the comet can also knock creatures over. Creatures who fail their Reﬂex save are knocked prone. A creature that succeeds on its saving throw takes half damage from the comet and is not knocked down. The comet breaks apart on impact, ﬁlling the 10-foot-square area with dense rubble (DMG 90). You must cast this spell in an area with at least 40 feet of vertical space above the point of impact. If you do not have 40 feet of space, the spell fails.  CONE OF DIMNESS  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Splaying your ﬁngers, you call upon the energies that dwell within the shadowy places of the world. Your arm shakes with barely contained power, causing a translucent gray cone to burst forth from your outstretched hand. Creatures in the cone must succeed on a Will save or believe darkness has engulfed them, rendering them blinded. A creature that makes its initial Will save suffers no ill effects.  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  CONTAGION, MASS  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 5, druid 5, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Forcingahackingcough,youcompletethe spell. In the area you’ve designated, you see swirling red and black mist rise up, accompanied by the distant sound of your echoing cough. This spell functions like contagion (PH 213), but all creatures within the area are infected.  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Cleric 7  Greater consumptive ﬁeld snuffs out the lives of the weak and grants tremendous power to evil clerics  Illus. by R. Horsley  Sweeping your arm about and clutching it to your chest, you draw the last breaths of fallen foes from their choking mouths and inhale them to fuel your own power.  CONSUMPTIVE FIELD, GREATER  This spell functions like consumptive ﬁeld, except that the ﬁeld affects all creatures in the area with 9 hit points or fewer. Such creatures that fail their saving throws die, and creatures that fall to 9 hit points or lower in the area after the spell is cast are likewise subject to its effect.  CHAPTER 1  CONSUMPTIVE FIELD  All creatures in the area with fewer than 0 hit points that fail their saving throws die, and you gain 1d8 temporary hit points and a +2 bonus to Strength for each death caused by this spell and until the spell’s duration expires. Additionally, your effective caster level increases by one per death caused by this spell, to a maximum increase of half your original caster level, improving spell effects that are dependent on caster level. (This increase in effective caster level does not grant you access to more spells, and it does not increase the duration of this spell.) Creatures that fall to –1 hit points or lower in the area after the spell is cast are likewise subject to its effect. No creature can be affected by this spell more than once per casting, regardless of the number of times that the area of the spell passes over them.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A creature that fails its initial save can attempt a new saving throw each round until it succeeds or the spell expires. Failing the subsequent saving throws results in continued blindness. Success on a later save means the creature feels its vision beginning to clear, although its vision remains dim and hazy for the remainder of the spell. This results in a 20% miss chance for any attack the creature makes.  51  CONTAGIOUS FOG  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spitting the last phrase of the spell, you throw out your arm, and a brown mist whirls into being around your foes. This spell functions like fog cloud (PH 232), except as noted here. Each round that a creature is within the fog, it must make a Fortitude save or contract a disease equivalent to the shakes (DMG 292), which strikes immediately (no incubation period). A creature afﬂicted with this disease takes 1d8 points of Dexterity damage immediately, and each day that the disease persists, it must make a DC 13 Fortitude save or take another 1d8 points of Dexterity damage. The fog moves away from you at 10 feet per round, rolling along the surface of the ground or water. (Figure out the cloud’s new spread each round based on its new center, which is 10 feet farther away from the point of origin where you cast the spell.) Because the vapors are heavier than air, they sink to the lowest level of the surface over which they move, pouring down sinkhole openings, and even down through minute cracks. Contagious fog cannot penetrate liquids, nor can it be cast underwater. Material Component: A used handkerchief.  CONTAGIOUS TOUCH  Necromancy Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Holding out your hand like it’s dead, you croakoutmagicwordsandimbueyourlimb with a terrible disease. Upon casting this spell, you choose one disease from this list: blinding sickness, cackle fever, ﬁlth fever, mindﬁre,  52  red ache, the shakes, or slimy doom (DMG 292). Any living creature you hit with a melee touch attack during the spell’s duration is affected as though by the contagion spell, immediately contracting the disease you have selected unless it makes a successful Fortitude save. You cannot infect more than one creature per round.  CONTINGENT ENERGY RESISTANCE Abjuration Level: Cleric 4, druid 4, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  Asyouﬁnishchantingthewords,apearlescentﬁlmcoversyourbodybeforefadinginto yourskin,apalerainbowofcolorsoffering their protection against potential damage to come. This spell functions similarly to contingency (PH 213), but with a more limited scope. While contingent energy resistance is in effect, if you are dealt damage associated with one of the ﬁve types of energy (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic), the spell automatically grants you resistance 10 against that type of energy for up to 10 minutes per caster level, or until the remainder of the spell’s duration, just as if you were under the effect of a resist energy spell of the appropriate type. Once the energy type protected against by a particular casting of this spell is determined, it can’t be changed. You can’t have more than one contingent energy resistance in effect on yourself at the same time—if you cast the spell a second time while an earlier casting is still in effect, the earlier spell automatically expires. The energy resistance granted by this spell does not stack with similar beneﬁts against the same energy type (such as from the resist energy spell). However, it is possible to be simultaneously under the effect of resist energy (ﬁre) and contingent energy resistance (electricity), or any other two such spells that protect against different types of energy. Material Component: An oyster shell.  CONVICTION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You hold the holy passage in your hand and touch your ally, intoning the spell. A sea-blue nimbus of light blossoms about his head and shoulders, strengthening his resolve. This spell bolsters the mental, physical, and spiritual strength of the creature touched. The spell grants the subject a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, with an additional +1 to the bonus for every six caster levels you have (maximum +5 morale bonus at 18th level). Material Component: A small parchment with a bit of holy text written upon it.  CONVICTION, MASS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allies in a 20-ft.-radius burst You hold the holy passage aloft and invoke the power of its words. Around you, your friends are bathed in a sea-blue nimbus of light. This spell functions like conviction, except that it affects multiple allies at a distance.  CORONA OF COLD  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes As you complete the spell you feel your extremities turn ice cold, numb, and slug-  gish.Thefeelingsubsidesasthecolddrains away from your body into the air around you,causingyourbreathtoemergeaswhite puffs in the now-chill air.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You brush your ﬁngers against the enemy, and immediately his bones begin to soften until he ﬂows down into a ﬂesh-colored puddle. Your touch transforms a living creature into a spongy, amorphous mass, its shape melting and writhing uncontrollably. An affected creature is unable to hold or use any item. Soft or misshapen feet and legs reduce speed to 10 feet, or one-quarter normal, whichever is less (minimum 5 feet). The victim becomes blinded and cannot cast spells or use magic items, and searing pain renders it incapable of attacking. While in this form, the creature has immunity to extra damage from critical hits and sneak attacks due to its amorphous nature. A conscious victim can regain its own shape by taking a standard  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ghostly hand and candle Duration: 1 minute/level (D); see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youholdoutapieceofﬂeshbeforeyou,and as you concentrate on your desired spell effect,theﬂeshdissolvesintonothingness. Nearby, in the place of your choosing, a severed hand appears bearing a lit candle. The ghostly hand carries a lit candle that sheds light in a 5-foot radius. You can move the hand at the beginning of your turn as you desire—forward or back, up or down, straight or around corners—up to 50 feet per round. Directing the candle is a free action. The hand and candle are incorporeal and can pass through objects. A corpse candle illuminates hidden, ethereal, and invisible beings and items, all of which become faintly visible as wispy outlines. Ethereal creatures remain unreachable from the Material Plane (except with force effects), but illuminated incorporeal and invisible creatures do not beneﬁt from concealment, and so attacks against them suffer no miss chance. The hand cannot be attacked or damaged, though dispel magic and similar spells can dispel it. The hand winks out if the distance between you and it exceeds the spell’s range. Material Component: A piece of a corpse untreated by any kind of preservative.  CORROSIVE GRASP  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action  Your hand glistens and smokes from a viscouscoatingofacid.Itdoesnotharmyou, but your opponents are less fortunate. A touch attack with this hand causes 1d8 points of acid damage. You can use this melee touch attack up to one time per level. You can also deal this damage as extra damage with an unarmed strike or an attack with a natural weapon. If you grapple an opponent, you can deal this damage in addition to other damage you deal with a successful grapple check.  CHAPTER 1  CORPOREAL INSTABILITY  CORPSE CANDLE  Range: Touch Targets: Creatures touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You are surrounded by a protective aura of cold that also causes damage to others within its radius. You gain resistance to ﬁre 10. Starting in the round you cast the spell, corona of cold also deals 1d12 points of cold damage each round at the beginning of your turn to all other creatures within the area. A successful save prevents the damage caused by the spell in that round, but does not prevent damage in future rounds. Creatures damaged by the spell shiver uncontrollably, taking a –2 penalty to their Strength and Dexterity and moving at half speed for as long as they remain within the area; these penalties do not stack with consecutive rounds of damage or additional corona of cold spells.  action to attempt a new save in any later round. Success ends the spell effect. Each round the victim spends in an amorphous state, it takes 1 point of Wisdom drain from mental shock. If the victim’s Wisdom is reduced to 0, it falls unconscious.  COUNTERMOON  Abjuration Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One lycanthrope Duration: 12 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (D) Spell Resistance: Yes Translucent red chains ﬂy from your outstretched hand to wrap around the target before fading away. This spell forces a lycanthrope back to its natural form and keeps it from changing form, preventing both voluntary shapechanging through the alternate form ability and involuntary shapechanging because of lycanthropy. Material Component: A hair, scale, or other cast-off item from the type of creature.  CRABWALK  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  53  Corpse candle sometimes reveals things you wish you hadn’t seen  The creature you touch now moves much faster, scuttling about with disconcerting ease.  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  This spell creates a number of tentacles that surround you but do not interfere with your movement or spellcasting. They provide concealment and completely hide your features. You gain a +4 competence bonus on grapple checks, Climb checks, and Escape Artist checks. When you are attacked, the tentacles strike back at your attacker. They have an attack bonus equal to your base attack bonus + your Wis modiﬁer, and a successful attack deals 1d12 points of damage.  CREAKING CACOPHONY  Illusion (Figment) [Sonic] Level: Bard 3, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Noise swells into a cacophonous din, as if hundredsofintertwinedtreesandbranches  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You ﬁnish the last detail and lean back to lookatyourwork.Thetattoolooksgood.It should prove useful. This spell creates a single magic tattoo. You determine the exact type of tattoo, though the selection is limited by your caster level, as indicated below. You must possess a modicum of artistic talent to sketch the desired tattoo—at least 1 rank of Craft (drawing), Craft (painting), Craft (calligraphy), or a similar Craft skill. Inscribing a magic tattoo requires a successful Craft check. The DC varies with the kind of tattoo, as noted below. If you are a 3rd- to 6th-level caster, you can inscribe a tattoo that generates any one of the following effects (Craft DC 10). • +2 resistance bonus on one type of saving throw (Fortitude, Reﬂex, or Will). • +1 luck bonus on attack rolls. • +1 deﬂection bonus to AC.  When your caster level reaches 13th, you can add the following to the list of tattoos you can inscribe (Craft DC 20). • Spell resistance equal to 10 + 1 per three caster levels. • +2 enhancement bonus to any one ability score. • +1 spellcaster level. This effect increases the subject’s effective level, but not the total number of spells. For example, an 11th-level caster who receives this tattoo functions as a 12th-level caster for the purpose of determining level-based spell variables (such as range, area, effect, and so on), but he does not receive any extra spells. A single creature can have only three magic tattoos at a time. Any attempt to apply more than that automatically fails. A successful erase spell removes a single magic tattoo. A successful dispel magic spell can remove multiple magic tattoos if targeted on the creature bearing them. Material Components: Tattoo inks in appropriate colors costing at least 100 gp. Focus: Tattoo needles.  Illus. by C. Dien  Ashroudofdark,writhingtentaclesforms around your body as you speak the spell’s ﬁnal syllables.  CREATE MAGIC TATTOO  • +2 resistance bonus on saving throws. • +2 competence bonus on attack rolls.  CHAPTER 1  CRAWLING DARKNESS  The sound from this spell is as loud as a pitched battle and is audible far beyond the spell’s area. Outside the spell’s area, the sound is merely loud. Inside the spell’s area, the sound is overwhelming. All creatures within the spell’s area take a –4 penalty on Listen checks. Spellcasters are distracted and must make a Concentration check to cast any spell (DC equals this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). A creaking cacophony spell enhances and focuses sonic energy. Creatures in the area that do not have immunity to sonic damage gain vulnerability to sonic damage.  At 7th to 12th caster level, you can add the following tattoos to the list that you can inscribe (Craft DC 15).  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  When the subject of this spell charges, it gains a +4 bonus on its attack roll and takes no penalty to Armor Class. This beneﬁt replaces the normal +2 bonus on attack rolls and –2 penalty to AC that a charge attack normally confers. If the creature is capable of multiple attacks after a charge, such as a lion with the pounce ability, the bonus applies only to the ﬁrst attack. Material Component: A crab’s leg.  were rubbing together in a chaotic medley of groans and creaks.  CREEPING COLD  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 3 rounds Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Reaching out your hand and making a crushing motion, you turn the subject’s sweattoice,creatingblistersastheiceforms on and inside the skin.  55  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject takes 1d6 cumulative points of cold damage per round (that is, 1d6 on the 1st round, 2d6 on the second, and 3d6 on the third). Only one save is allowed against the spell; if successful, it halves the damage each round. Focus: A small glass or pottery vessel worth at least 25 gp ﬁlled with ice, snow, or water.  CREEPING COLD, GREATER Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 4 Duration: See text  This spell is the same as creeping cold, but the duration increases by 1 round, during which the subject takes 4d6 points of cold damage. If you are at least 15th level, the spell lasts for 5 rounds and deals 5d6 points of cold damage. If you are at least 20th level, the spell lasts for 6 rounds and deals 6d6 points of cold damage.  CRITICAL STRIKE  Divination Level: Assassin 1, bard 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Upon uttering the ancient phrase that completes the spell, you feel the weapon in your hand drawn toward a creature standing nearby. Whenever you make a melee attack against a ﬂanked foe or against a foe denied its Dexterity bonus, you deal an extra 1d6 points of damage, your weapon’s threat range is doubled (as if under the effect of keen edge), and you gain a +4 insight bonus on rolls made to conﬁrm critical threats. The increased threat range granted by this spell doesn’t stack with any other effect that increases your weapon’s threat range. Creatures immune to extra damage from sneak attacks are immune to the extra damage dealt by your attacks.  56  CROWN OF GLORY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Glory 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: 20 ft. Targets: You and one creature/level in a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Whenyoucastthisspell,youcrownyourself with your deity’s favor and draw all eyes toward you. You are imbued with an aura of celestial authority, inspiring awe in all lesser creatures that behold your terrible perfection and righteousness. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Charisma for the duration of the spell. In addition, the subject creatures gain a +4 morale bonus on attack rolls, saves, and skill checks, immunity to fear effects, and temporary hit points equal to your caster level (maximum 20).  CRUMBLE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One structure or construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) With a ﬁnal word and gesture, time takes controloftheobject,erodingitawaybefore your eyes, aging it several centuries in a few seconds. You bring the forces of erosion to bear on a fabricated structure such as a stone bridge, a wooden building, an iron wall, a construct, or any other object not formed by nature itself. The erosion deals 1d8 points of damage per caster level to the object (hardness does not apply) to a maximum of 10d8. The maximum size of  the object affected depends on your level. If you cast this spell on an object of greater size than you can affect, the spell fails. Level Up to 9th 10th–15th 16th–18th 19th–20th  Size of Object Affected Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  CURSE OF ILL FORTUNE Transmutation Level: Blackguard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Lettinglooseastreamoffoulincantations, you curse the subject. You place a temporary curse upon the subject, giving it a –3 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks. Curse of ill fortune is negated by any spell that removes a bestow curse spell.  CURSE OF ILL FORTUNE, MASS Necromancy Level: Cleric 5 Targets: Enemies in a 20-ft.-radius burst  This spell functions like curse of ill fortune, except that it affects multiple enemies.  CURSE OF IMPENDING BLADES  Necromancy Level: Bard 2, ranger 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  You grip the nail-pierced hunk of leather and cast the spell. A small black dagger jets from the tip of the nail and strikes your opponent squarely in the chest.  Necromancy Level: Bard 3, ranger 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Targets: Enemies in a 20-ft.-radius burst This spell functions like curse of impending blades, except that it affects multiple enemies.  CURSE OF LYCANTHROPY  Necromancy Level: Pestilence 6 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Humanoid touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Dipping your hand in blood and then grippingthetargetﬁercely,youcallonthecurse of lycanthropy to destroy your foe. If the target fails its saving throw, it dies, and 1d6 wererats (in wererat form; MM 173) claw their way out of its body. The wererats do not attack you or your allies, but might attack nearby living creatures. If no target is available, the wererats scurry away to spread their lycanthropy. Material Component: A pint of animal blood.  CURSED BLADE Necromancy Level: Assassin 4  A weapon affected by this spell deals wounds that can’t be healed in the usual fashion. Any damage dealt by the weapon (not including damage from special weapon properties such as ﬂaming, holy, wounding, and so on) cannot be cured by any means until the damaged individual has received a remove curse spell (or some other effect that neutralizes a curse). If a creature is slain by a weapon that is under the effect of this spell, it can’t be raised from the dead unless a remove curse spell (or similar effect) is cast on the body or a true resurrection spell is used.  CUTTING HAND  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: Your hand Duration: 1 round/level (D) Yourhandtinglesasasmooth,metallicedge extrudesfromtheoutsideofyourpalmand curls up along your ﬁngertips, forming a ﬂexible, razor-sharp blade. You alter the structure of your hand so that it becomes as hard and sharp as a blade. Your hand deals 1d6 points of damage (1d4 if you are Small, and 1d8 if you are Large) and gains a +2 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls. You are considered armed with this hand. Your hand’s enhancement bonus does not apply to melee touch attacks.  CYCLONIC BLAST  Evocation [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  Cuppingachild’stop,youforcefullythrust yourhandforward,simultaneouslyspeaking the ﬁnal words of the spell’s proscribed formula. Immediately thereafter, a blast of whirling wind issues forth from your outstretchedﬁngers,sweepingupwithinit all who stand in its way. You send a twisting torrent of wind, not unlike a tornado turned on its side, toward your enemies. A cyclonic blast deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6 points of damage) to all creatures and objects in the area. Objects bigger than Large take half damage. The cyclonic blast begins at your ﬁngertips. Creatures who fail their Reﬂex saving throws against a cyclonic blast are additionally in danger of being knocked back by the force of the wind. Treat this as a bull rush attack made with a +12 bonus on the Strength check. The cyclonic blast always moves with the opponent to push that target back the full distance allowed, and (unlike a normal bull rush) you can exceed your normal movement limit with a sufﬁciently high check result. Airborne creatures are treated as if they were one size category smaller for the purpose of resisting the bull rush. If the damage caused to an interposing barrier by the blast shatters or breaks through it, the cyclonic blast can continue beyond the barrier if the spell’s range permits; otherwise, it stops at the barrier just as any other spell effect does. Focus: A child’s spinning top.  CHAPTER 1  CURSE OF IMPENDING BLADES, MASS  Drawingupondarkpowers,youwhispera vehementcurseanddrawyourﬁngerdown the weapon.  Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The target of the spell has a hard time avoiding attacks, sometimes even seeming to stumble into harm’s way. The subject takes a –2 penalty to AC. The curse cannot be dispelled, but it can be removed with a break enchantment,limitedwish,miracle,removecurse, or wish spell. Arcane Material Component: A nail through a piece of leather.  Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: One melee weapon Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  DAGGERSPELL STANCE Abjuration Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  The daggers in your hands glow silver as you complete the spell. They feel as if they have become a part of your body.  57  Illus. by R. Horsley  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  While this spell is in effect, if you make a full attack while holding a dagger in each hand, you gain a +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls made with daggers in that round. The magical energy that permeates your daggers while this spell is active allows you to deﬂect the magical energy of spells. When wielding two daggers and ﬁghting defensively, you gain spell resistance equal to 5 + your caster level. The spell focuses your concentration so that when you devote all of your attention to defense, you can turn the force of most blows away from your body with your daggers. When wielding two daggers and using the total defense action, you gain both the spell resistance beneﬁt described above and damage reduction 5/magic. Focus: A pair of daggers.  DANCE OF THE UNICORN  Abjuration Level: Druid 5, Puriﬁcation 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 5 ft./level Area: 5 ft./level-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Whirling your pointed ﬁnger through a complexgesture,youcreateacoolandfresh mist that cleanses the air of pollutants. You surround yourself with a purifying, swirling mist that washes the air clean of smoke, dust, and poisons. Nonmagical contaminants, including inhaled poisons, are automatically negated within the cloud. Dance of the unicorn also grants everyone within the mist a +4 bonus on saving throws against magical or supernatural gas effects, such as acid fog, cloudkill, and green dragon breath. The cloud of mist leaves everything within its area damp.  58  on a dark way without penalty, since it is no more slippery than a typical dungeon ﬂoor. A dark way can support a maximum of 200 pounds per caster level. Creatures that cause the total weight on a dark way to exceed this limit fall through it as if it weren’t there. You never fall through a dark way unless your own weight exceeds the spell’s maximum capacity.  DARKBOLT  Evocation [Darkness] Level: Darkness 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One ray/2 levels (maximum seven rays) Du ration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Daggerspell stance turns its caster into a deadly dervish  DARK WAY  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Bard 2, cleric 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One bridge of force 5 ft. wide, 1 in. thick, and up to 20 ft./level long Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You stand at the edge of the canyon and invokethepower.Atyourfeetappearsathin black bridge that arches over the canyon. You create a ribbonlike, weightless, unbreakable bridge. A dark way must be anchored at both ends to solid objects, but otherwise can be at any angle. Like a wall of force (PH 298), it must be continuous and unbroken when formed. It is typically used to cross a chasm or a hazardous space. Creatures can move  With a quick invocation to your deity, you call forth a nimbus of jet-black night. This terrible radiance, laced with the will of your deity, allows you to shoot black bolts of power. You unleash beams of darkness from your open palm. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to strike your target. You can hurl one bolt for every two caster levels you have (maximum seven bolts). You can hurl all the bolts at once, or you can hurl one bolt per round as a free action, starting in the round when you cast the spell. You do not have to hurl a bolt in every round, but if you don’t hurl the bolt you were entitled to in a round, it is lost. If you hurl all the bolts at once, all your targets must be within 60 feet of each other. A darkbolt deals 2d8 points of damage to a living creature, and the creature is dazed for 1 round unless it makes a Will save (a creature struck by multiple bolts during the same round is dazed for a maximum of 1 round, no matter how many times it fails its save). An undead creature takes no damage, but is dazed if it fails its save.  DARKFIRE  Evocation [Fire] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Flame in your palm Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  DARKVISION, MASS  Abjuration Level: Druid 0, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 15 ft. Target: All creatures in a 15-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) With a cry similar to a rooster’s you cast the spell. For a moment you feel as if you had just awakened from a comfortable nap, but as the feeling fades, those around you begin to stir. All sleeping creatures in the affected area awaken. Those who are unconscious because of nonlethal damage wake up and are staggered. This spell does not affect dying creatures.  DEAD END  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Assassin 1, bard 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level touched Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) or Will disbelief (if interacted with); see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Range: 10 ft. Targets: Allies in a 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you  Sprinklingspiceontheground,youcomplete theﬁnalstepofthespell.Upontouchingyour intendedtargets,younotewithsatisfaction that the area around all of you seems a little cleaner and less tread upon.  Asyouconcludethespell’scasting,youare aware of being able to see without light. A glance at your allies show that they too perceive more than before.  This spell ﬂawlessly disguises the spoor left by the subjects, concealing their tracks, scent, and other signs of their passage with an illusion that defeats even the senses of taste and touch. Any creature making a Search check, using the scent ability, or using the Survival skill to track a creature affected by this spell interacts with the illusion  This spell functions like darkvision (PH 216), except that all target creatures receive the spell’s beneﬁts. Unlike with darkvision, recipients of this spell  DEADFALL  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: Mass of dead wood forming in a cylinder (20-ft. radius, 40 ft. high); see text Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Dark ﬂames appear in your hand. You can hurl them or use them to touch enemies. The ﬂames appear in your open hand and harm neither you nor your equipment. They emit no light but produce the same amount of heat as an actual ﬁre. Beginning the following round, you can strike opponents with a melee touch attack, dealing 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). Alternatively, you can hurl the ﬂames up to 120 feet as a thrown weapon. When doing so, you make a ranged touch attack (with no range penalty) and deal the same damage as with the melee attack. No sooner do you hurl the ﬂames than a new set appears in your hand. The darkﬁre is invisible to normal vision but can be seen with darkvision as easily as a normal ﬂame can be seen in darkness (this means that darkﬁre can be used as a signal or beacon for creatures with darkvision). The spell does not function underwater.  DAWN  and can make a Will save to disbelieve. Creatures that succeed on the save can detect the subjects normally. Creatures merely passing through an area the subjects passed through do not count as interacting with the illusion. Targets of this spell can make a Will save to negate it, and spell resistance applies. Material Component: A pinch of some odoriferous spice.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Yourhandfeelswarmcuppingtheeldritch ﬂames. You cannot see the ﬁre in the shadows, but you know it is there, as will those who will soon feel the hungry ﬂames.  cannot have the ability made permanent with a permanency spell. Material Component: A dried carrot or three small agates.  Withtheﬁnalwordofthespellyoucallinto being a huge tower of logs and branches. It collapsestothegroundwitharoar,crushing creatures beneath its weight. Pick a point on the ground as the center of the radius and bottom of the cylinder. Deadfall creates a tangled mass of huge branches, logs, and fallen trees on the ground. The deadfall immediately collapses in on itself with terriﬁc force and noise. Creatures and objects in the area take 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6). In addition, creatures in the area must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be knocked prone. Once you cast the spell, a considerable volume of dead wood remains behind. This pile of brush is 5 feet high, with a 20-foot radius, and it counts as dense rubble (DMG 90).  DEAFENING CLANG  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Your weapon Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  59  Illus. by J. Jarvis  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  At your touch, the weapon rings like a struck tuning fork. The sound diminishes untilit’simperceptible,butwhenyoutouch the weapon you can feel the vibration. You empower the touched weapon with magic that causes it to emit a loud clang when it is struck against a hard surface, such as a ﬂoor, wall, or creature. The weapon deals 1d6 points of sonic damage with each successful hit, and any creature struck by the weapon must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or be deafened for 1 minute.  DEATH ARMOR  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Yousmearyourselfwithwhitepaste,drawingaskullonyourbareﬂesh.Immediately, a wreath of black ﬂames crackles to life around you. The black ﬂames created by this spell injure creatures that contact them. Any  The deadfall spell crushes the life fromits victims  creature striking you with its body or handheld weapons takes 1d4 points of damage +1 point per two caster levels (maximum +10). If the creature has spell resistance, it applies to the damage. Weapons with reach, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in this way. Material Component: Paste made from ground bones. Focus: An onyx worth 50 gp.  DEATH DRAGON  Necromancy [Evil, Fear, MindAffecting] Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Effect: Dragon-shaped armor of energy and bones Duration: 1 round/level (D) Yousummonunholypowertogirdyourself in a dragon-shaped cocoon of bones and negative energy. The cocoon created by this spell gives you a +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor and a +4 deﬂection bonus to Armor Class. You are treated as armed when you make unarmed attacks, and you deal damage as if your limbs were short swords of an appropriate size. You can use your off hand to attack, incurring the standard two-weapon ﬁghting penalties (PH 160). The cocoon prevents you from casting spells with  somatic, material, or focus (but not divine focus) components, but does not otherwise hinder your actions or movement. As a standard action, you can project a cone of fear or make a melee touch attack to use inﬂict critical wounds on the creature touched (the caster level of these effects equals your own). These effects are otherwise identical to the spells of the same names, but have saving throw DCs equal to what this spell’s save DC would be if the spell allowed a save.  DEATH PACT  Necromancy Level: Cleric 8, Pact 8 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched Duration: Permanent until triggered Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With the last words of power, you make theconvert’soathbindingandensureyour deity’s aid when the worst befalls his new servant. This spell allows the target to enter into a binding agreement with your deity that brings the target back to life if it is slain. When this spell is cast, the subject’s Constitution is permanently lowered by 2 points. In exchange for this, if the subject should die, a true resurrection spell (PH 296) is immediately cast upon the subject. However, the resurrected creature does not regain the 2 Constitution points when returned to life. If the spell is dispelled before the subject dies, it does not regain its 2 lost Constitution points. A wish or miracle spell can return the lost Constitution, but only after the death pact has been activated or dispelled. Material Component: A diamond worth at least 1,000 gp.  DEATH THROES  Necromancy [Force] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S  60  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level or until you are killed Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Youﬁnishthespell,andmysticduplicatesof youandyouralliesappearaheadofyou.As you move forward, they set out as well.  DEATH WARD, MASS  This spell functions like death ward (PH 217), except as noted above.  DECOMPOSITION  Necromancy Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 50 ft. Area: Living enemies within a 50-ft.radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Using your link to the natural world, you createanairofdecaythatmakesdeathcome quicker to the wounded. Whenever an enemy within the area takes normal (not nonlethal) damage, that wound festers for an additional 3  The deep breath spell gives Mialee some conﬁdence she’ll survive being dragged beneath the water by the sahuagin  stopped, however, any new wound taken while the subject is within the area (before the spell expires) begins the process anew. For example, a subject who takes 6 points of damage from an attack while within the area of a decomposition spell takes 3 points of damage from the festering wound in the next round, and another 3 points in the round after that. In the following round, that subject receives 4 points of healing from a cure light wounds spell, so the festering stops and the subject takes no festering damage that round. In the next round, the subject remains within the emanation and takes another 3 points of damage in battle. The festering begins again, dealing 3 points of festering damage in the following round.  In order to ﬂush ambushes, you project a duplicate image of yourself and your companions. This spell creates an illusion complete with visual images, sounds (including speech), smells, textures, and temperature. It mimics exactly what you and any of your allies within 50 feet of you do. If the terrain differs signiﬁcantly between that of the illusion and that of the characters, or if any character takes an action the illusion can’t duplicate (for instance, climbing a tree if none are present for the illusory duplicate to mimic) onlookers automatically receive a saving throw. In addition, anyone who moves out of the spell’s area disappears from the illusion.  Illus. by R. Spears  Necromancy Level: Cleric 8, druid 9 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/ level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  Sensingthesparkoflifeinyourallies through your magic, you bolster that spark and protect it from harm.  Illusion (Figment) Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: Figment that mimics you and all allies within 50 ft. of you Duration: 8 hours (D) Saving Throw: Will disbelief; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  If you are killed, your body is instantaneously destroyed in an explosion that deals 1d8 points of damage per caster level to everyone in a 30-foot-radius burst. This explosion destroys your body, preventing any form of raising or resurrection that requires part of the corpse. A wish, miracle, or true resurrection spell can restore life.  DECOY IMAGE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  As the killing blow falls, you smile with grim satisfaction even as the light of life fades, knowing that your enemy will soon be joining you in the afterlife.  points of damage at the beginning of its turn each round thereafter for the duration of the spell. A DC 15 Heal check or the application of any cure spell or other healing magic stops the festering. Only one wound festers at a time; additional wounds taken while the ﬁrst is still festering are not subject to this effect. Once festering has been  DEEP BREATH  Conjuration (Creation) [Air] Level: Druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You let out a quick cry and instantly feel your chest swell with air, as if you had taken a deep breath. Strangely, you feel no need to exhale. Your lungs instantly ﬁll with air, and continue to reﬁll with air for the duration of the spell. When the spell’s duration expires, you can continue  61  to hold your breath as if you had just gulped down a lungful of air. You can cast this spell with an instant utterance, quickly enough to save yourself from drowning after being suddenly plunged into water.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DEEPER DARKVISION  Transmutation Level: Ranger 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  and strike a creature or object you indicate as a ranged touch attack. Any creature struck by the sphere takes 3d6 points of damage from the force of its winds. In addition, Medium or smaller creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked prone. Creatures that fall prone must then succeed on a second Fortitude save or be swept up by the sphere and driven 1d8×10 feet into the air, dropping 1d6 squares from their original position in a random direction and taking falling damage as normal. If a window is within range,  Illus. by W. England  DEFENESTRATING SPHERE  62  When you cast this spell, you create a violently swirling sphere of air. As a move action, you can make the sphere travel up to 30 feet per round  Necromancy Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  You afﬂict the target with a horrible, desiccating curse that deals 1d6 points of Constitution damage, plus 1 additional point of Constitution damage per three caster levels, to a maximum of 1d6+5 at 15th level. Oozes, plants, and creatures with the aquatic subtype are more susceptible to this spell than other targets. Such creatures take 1d8 points of Constitution damage, plus 1 additional point of Constitution damage per three caster levels, to a maximum of 1d8+5.  The subject gains the ability to see 90 feet in total darkness and ignores the 20% miss chance normally present in shadowy illumination (such as might be created by a darkness spell). Deeper darkvision is black and white only but otherwise similar to normal sight. Material Component: A pinch of dried carrot or an agate.  From the pearl you hold between your thumb and ring ﬁnger erupts a cloudy gray sphere of whirling air and howling wind that ﬂies to attack your enemies.  DEHYDRATE  Withasqueezinggesture,youindicate your target and see sweat pour off it.  You toss the powdered dried carrot into the air as you cast this spell, and itvanishes.Youchooseyourselfasthe spell’srecipientandyoureyesbeginto glow with an alien purple luster.  Evocation [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 2-ft.-radius sphere Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  The sphere can affect a maximum of one creature or object per round, and winks out if it exceeds the spell’s range. Focus: A gray pearl worth at least 100 gp.  DEIFIC VENGEANCE  Scrolls provide spellcasters with a cheap way to have access to spells they don’t normally prepare  the subject is automatically thrown in that direction. If some obstacle prevents the subject creature from reaching its expelled height, it takes 1d6 points of damage for every 10 feet of movement it was unable to complete, so that a creature hurled 50 feet up in a room with a 20foot ceiling would take 3d6 points of damage from the impact, then take 2d6 points of damage when it falls back to the ground.  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Cleric 2, Puriﬁcation 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half Spell Resistance: Yes You call out to your deity, declaring your foe’s crimes and asking your deity to punish him. This spell deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6), or 1d6 points per caster level (maximum 10d6) if the target is undead.  DELAY DEATH  The subject of this powerful spell is unable to die from hit point damage. While under the protection of this spell, the normal limit of –9 hit points before a character dies is extended without limit. A condition or spell that destroys enough of the subject’s body so as to not allow raise dead to work, such as a disintegrate effect, still kills the creature, as does death brought about by ability score damage, level drain, or a death effect. The spell does not prevent the subject from entering the dying state by dropping to –1 hit points. It merely prevents death as a result of hit point loss. If the subject has fewer than –9 hit points when the spell’s duration expires, it dies instantly.  DELAY DISEASE  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You press your focus to the creature and implore the contagion that ravages it to lie dormant. As the spell takes effect, a dimyellowglowpassesoverthecreature’s body. The progress of any nonmagical disease that already afﬂicts the target is halted for the duration of the spell. Delay disease allows the subject to skip  DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes By shouting ﬂattering comments at your intended subject, you release the energy of the spell. The target of your spell glows momentarily with a white nimbus of crackling energy that fades to a sickly gray before disappearing completely. This powerful phantasm fools the subject into believing itself more competent and safe than it really is. The spell makes any action the subject considers attempting seem easily accomplished, requiring only a token effort. Deadly wounds seem like mere scratches, stalwart foes appear weak and intimidated, and the subject’s own attacks seem stronger and more effective. As a result of its skewed perceptions, the subject takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls, saves, ability checks, and skill checks, as well as to Wisdom. This penalty cannot reduce the subject’s Wisdom below 1. Finally, the subject becomes so completely enamored with its own (false) abilities that it cannot ﬁght defensively or take the total defense action.  DEMON DIRGE  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF  You cry out the ancient words and make the prescribed motions, and your foe lets out a howl of pain as his blood boils in his veins. Demon dirge deals 2d6 points of damage each round for the duration of the spell to any creature that has both the chaotic and evil subtypes (such as a howler or a demon). No saving throw is allowed against this damage. If the target creature also possesses the tanar’ri subtype (MM 316), the spell has a much more powerful effect. In addition to the damage, a tanar’ri is stunned for the duration of the spell unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save.  CHAPTER 1  Yougesturetowardyourallyandcallupon thepowerofyourbeliefs.Asoft,goldenglow appearsonyourcompanion’schest,around his heart.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Living creature Duration: 1d6 rounds; see text Saving Throw: None or Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  the required saving throw against the disease for the day that the spell is in effect. During this period, the subject accrues no further ability damage from the disease. A skipped saving throw counts as neither a success nor a failure for the purpose of recovery from the disease. Furthermore, the incubation period of any disease to which the subject is exposed during the spell’s duration does not begin until the spell expires. Delay disease does not cure any damage that a disease might already have dealt, and it has no effect on magical or supernatural diseases.  DEMONHIDE  Abjuration [Evil] Level: Blackguard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Evil creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your minion with your holy symbol and invoke the horrid words of the lower planes. A ﬁery glow spreads across your servant’s skin, leaving it with a deep red luster. The subject gains damage reduction 5/cold iron or good.  DESICCATING BUBBLE  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 3-ft.-radius sphere of air Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  63  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  From your outstretched hand bursts a small sphere similar in appearance to a soapbubble.Itquicklyexpandsandspeeds in the direction you indicate. A globe of supernaturally dry air rolls in whichever direction you point and engulfs those it strikes. It moves 30 feet per round and can leap up to 30 feet to strike a target. If it enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for the round and deals 2d4 points of damage as it evaporates moisture from the subject. (The subject can negate this damage with a successful Reﬂex save.) Oozes, creatures composed of water (such as water elementals), and creatures with the aquatic subtype take 2d6 points of damage. The bubble moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action for you); otherwise, it merely stays at rest. The surface of the bubble has a spongy, yielding consistency (similar to that of a soap bubble, but not fragile and allowing objects to pass through it without affecting the spell) and so does not cause damage except by absorbing moisture. It cannot batter down large obstacles. The bubble winks out if it exceeds the spell’s range. Arcane Material Component: A tiny bag or bladder ﬁlled with air, and a sprinkle of dust.  DETECT FAVORED ENEMY  Divination Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Quarter circle emanating from you to the extreme of the range Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Usingyourpassionforﬁghtingyourfoe,you reach out with your magic and your mind to sense the presence of your enemies. You can sense the presence of a favored enemy. The amount of information revealed depends on how long you study a particular area. 1st Round: Presence or absence of a favored enemy in the area.  64  2nd Round: Types of favored enemies in the area and the number of each type. 3rd Round: The location and HD of each individual present. Note: Each round you can turn to detect things in a new area. The spell can penetrate barriers, but 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt blocks detection.  DEVIL BLIGHT  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Living creature Duration: 1d6 rounds Saving Throw: None or Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You cry out the ancient words and make the prescribed motions, and your foe lets out a shriek of agony as it stumbles under the force of the spell. This spell deals 2d6 points of damage per round for the duration of the spell to creatures that have both the lawful and evil subtypes (such as a barghest or a devil). No saving throw is allowed against this damage. If the target creature also possesses the baatezu subtype (MM 306), it must succeed on a Fortitude save or be stunned for the duration of the spell.  DIAMONDSTEEL  Transmutation Level: Paladin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Suit of metal armor touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You pass your hand over the suit of armor several times before ﬁnally touching it. As you do so, you feel a warmth grow in the palm of your hand. The warmth passes into the armor and manifests as a sparkling shine.  Diamondsteel enhances the strength of one suit of metal armor. The armor provides damage reduction equal to half the AC bonus of the armor. This damage reduction can be overcome only by adamantine weapons. For example, a suit of full plate would provide damage reduction 4/adamantine, and a +1 breastplate (+6 AC) would provide damage reduction 3/adamantine. Material Component: Diamond dust worth at least 50 gp.  DIMENSION DOOR, GREATER  Conjuration [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Range: Touch Target: You and touched objects or other touched willing creatures Duration: 1 round/2 levels Your ﬂesh gives an involuntary shudder asyouwillyourselfelsewhere.Youvanish, reappearing some distance away. This spell functions like dimension door (PH 221), except as noted above and that you can transfer the targets once per round, up to a distance of 25 feet + 5 feet per two levels, as a move action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  DINOSAUR STAMPEDE  Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Throwing down and shattering a fossil to complete the spell, you call upon potent natural forces and energies, and manifest them in the form of a swath of intangible, spectral, stampeding dinosaurs. Creatures in the spell’s area take 1d12 points of damage +1 point per caster level (up to +20). Creatures more than 10 feet above the ground are not affected by dinosaur stampede. With a simple gesture (a free action), you can make the spectral forms move  along the ground up to 40 feet per round (moving its effective point of origin). Creatures cannot be damaged more than once per round by dinosaur stampede. Material Component: A fossil.  DIRE HUNGER  The subject creature adds 1-1/2 times its Strength bonus to this damage. If the creature already has a bite attack that deals more damage, use that damage value instead. The subject creature eschews all other attacks or actions except for its new bite attack, but it defends itself normally. It moves to attack the nearest living creature it can get to and attacks this creature until it is dead or until another living creature is closer. The subject creature attacks whatever living creature is nearest, regardless of former allegiance or personal connection. If moving toward the nearest living creature would move the creature into  DIRGE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: 50 ft. Area: All enemies within a 50-ft.radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Asyousing,translucentspectralskullsﬂoat down from the sky like falling snow. Your song draws the energies of death and destruction down on your enemies. Each round, any enemy in the area takes 2 points of Strength and Dexterity damage. Subjects can attempt a Fortitude save each round to negate the damage, but a successful save does not prevent damage in future rounds.  CHAPTER 1  The spell’s subject becomes maddened by terrible pangs of hunger, viewing all creatures as food sources.  1 1d2 1d3 1d4 1d6 1d8 2d6 2d8 4d6  Illus. by J. Jarvis  You feel pangs of hunger well up within your abdomen as you complete the spell. A blood-red glow of energy radiates from yourintendedtargetandthehungeryoufelt subsides.Thetargetcreature’sfaceelongates intoatoothy,dinosaurlikesnoutﬁlledwith serratedteeth,anditsbellydistendsasifthe creature were undernourished.  Fine Diminutive Tiny Small Medium Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  a dangerous area (precarious footing, a huge ﬁre, or a deadly trap is in the way) the subject creature moves around the hazard if it can or moves to attack another creature if moving around the hazard isn’t possible. If such movement brings the subject creature closer to another living creature, it attacks that creature instead. If the subject of the spell cannot detect or get to a living creature nearby, it goes looking for one to attack.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  The subject creature gains a new bite attack that does damage according to the creature’s size:  A dinosaur stampede mows down anything in its path  65  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DIRGE OF DISCORD  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Evil, Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You create an unholy, cacophonous dirge thatﬁllsthetargets’mindswiththescreams ofthedying,thewailingofthedamned,and the howling of the mad.  For the purpose of this spell, a shapechanger is any creature with the shapechanger type or a supernatural or extraordinary ability that allows it to assume an alternate form. A wizard who knows alter self is not a shapechanger (since a spell is not a supernatural or extraordinary ability), but a barghest is (since it has the supernatural ability to assume alternate forms, even though its type is outsider). Material Component: A balm of honey and lotus ﬂower costing 25 gp, smeared on your eyelids.  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: 1 corporeal undead Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  DISCERN SHAPECHANGER  One cannot just march a ghoul into the Duke’s Court. But as the fumesissuingfromthecocoonsurround the creature, the form of the ghoul is replaced with that of a stately courtier armed with a rapier. Of course, it will have to keep its mouth shut.  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  By taking a standard action to concentrate, you can see the true form of creatures within 60 feet. Each round, you can examine one creature you can see to determine whether it is polymorphed, disguised, or transmuted, and what its true form is. If you look at a shapechanger in its true form, you immediately sense its shapechanging ability, but you can’t determine what other forms it might be capable of assuming.  66  This spell causes a color pool on the Astral Plane—an irregular patch of color containing a portal to another plane—to appear to be a different color, and thus, to lead to another plane. True seeing or analyze portal reveals the true nature of the pool. Material Component: Four drops of colored ink.  DISGUISE UNDEAD  Creatures affected by this spell take a –4 penalty on attack rolls and Dexterity, a 50% reduction in their speed (to a minimum of 5 feet), and must make a Concentration check to cast any spell (DC equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). Material Component: A pinch of ashes from a destrachan.  The smell of wet animal dander assaults your nose even as the perfume of the material component fades. You feel suddenly more suspicious of beings around you, as if some of them might not be what they seem.  Thecolorpoolglowswiththerust-shadeof Hades, but a few words and a spattering of ink, and it glows with the amber of the BlessedFieldsofElysium.Thosewhopass through it will not know their error until it is too late.  Many wizards jealously guard their spellsbooks, placing magical and mundane wards upon them  DISCOLOR POOL  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One color pool Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: No  You make one undead—including its clothing, armor, weapons, and equipment—look different. You can make it seem 1 foot shorter or taller, thin, fat, or in between. You cannot change the creature’s body type. For example, a wight could look human, humanoid, or like any other generally humanshaped bipedal creature. Otherwise, the extent of the apparent change is up to you. You could add or obscure a minor feature, such as a mole or a beard, or make it look like an entirely different creature. The spell does not provide the abilities or mannerisms of the chosen form. It does not alter the perceived tactile (touch) or audible (sound) properties of the undead or its equipment. A bat-  Abjuration Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One warded object or area Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Your head throbs with energy as you recite theﬁnalfewphrasesofthespell.Amoment later, the energy releases and the area you designatedasthespell’stargetglowssilver forseveralseconds.Youhearasoundlikea mechanical object winding down. This spell functions like dispel magic (PH 223), except that it can be used only in the targeted or area version, and it affects only abjuration magic placed upon objects or areas (such as arcanelock,explosiverunes,ﬁretrap,glyph of warding, and guards and wards.) The maximum bonus on the level check is +10.  DISPELLING BREATH Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  Youexhaleacloudofpoisonousgasmixed with starlight motes that gravitate toward the spellcasters and summoned monsters within the cloud. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a super-  DISPELLING SCREEN  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Energy wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level, or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 1 ft./level Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Bytossingdownthesheetofcrystalinyour handandcompletingthemysteriouswords ofpowerneededtoreleasetheenergyofthe spell,youcreateanimmobile,shimmering screen of violet energy.  Any spell effect operating on a creature or unattended object that passes through the screen is affected as by a targeted dispel magic (PH 223) at your caster level. Attended items that pass through are not affected by the screen, which is the only way the screen differs from a normal targeted casting of dispel magic—attended items are essentially not targeted by the screen. Make a caster level check (1d20 + 1 per caster level, maximum +10) to dispel spell effects (DC 11 + caster level) or suppress an unattended object’s magical properties for 1d4 rounds (DC equal to the item’s caster level). Spell effects not operating on objects or creatures cannot pass through the screen. A disintegrate or successful dispel magic removes dispelling screen, while an antimagic ﬁeld suppresses it. Material Component: A sheet of ﬁne lead crystal.  CHAPTER 1  DISPEL WARD  natural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, your breath weapon acts as a targeted dispel magic (PH 223). For each creature or object that fails its saving throw against your breath weapon and that is the subject of one or more spells, you make a dispel check against the highest level spell currently in effect on the object or creature. A dispel check is 1d20 + 1 per caster level (maximum +15) against a DC of 11 + the spell’s caster level. If that check fails, you make dispel checks against progressively weaker spells until you dispel one spell or until you fail all your checks. A creature’s magic items are not affected, and creatures and objects that rolled successful saving throws against your breath weapon are likewise not affected. If a creature that is the effect of an ongoing spell (such as a monster summoned by monster summoning), is in the area and fails its saving throw against your breath weapon, you can also make a dispel check to end the spell that conjured the creature (returning it whence it came). For each ongoing area or effect spell centered within the area of your breath weapon, you make a dispel check to dispel the spell. Spells are dispelled prior to the effect of your breath weapon being resolved. You can choose to automatically succeed on dispel checks against any spell in the area that you have cast.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  tleaxe made to look like a dagger still functions as a battleaxe. This spell also foils magical means of detecting undead. The subject of disguise undead detects as a creature of the type simulated. Creatures get Will saves to recognize the glamer as an illusion if they interact with the subject (such as by touching the undead and having that not match what they see, in the case of this spell). Focus: A cocoon of a death’s head moth.  DISPELLING SCREEN, GREATER  Abjuration Level: Drow 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Thisspellfunctionslikedispellingscreen, except that the maximum caster level bonus on the dispel check is +20.  DISPLACER FORM  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Youdroptoyourhandsandkneesamoment before your extremities morph into the limbs of a great black panther. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a displacer beast (MM 66). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to magical beast, and your size changes to Large. You have the space and reach of a displacer beast (15 feet/5 feet [10 feet with tentacles]). You gain two tentacle attacks, which each deal 1d6 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer. You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average displacer  67  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Illus. by J. Engle  Displacer form gives a spellcaster some obvious advantages  68  beast (Str 18, Dex 15, Con 16), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your base land speed becomes 40 feet. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You also gain low-light vision. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any spell-like abilities of your own form, and you lose any extraordinary special abilities from your own form. You retain any supernatural abilities of your own form. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You can speak and cast spells while in displacer beast form, but you must physically touch any necessary material components. Your natural armor bonus becomes +5, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form. While in displacer beast form, you gain the displacer beast’s displacement and resistance to ranged attacks abilities. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Material Component: A single claw from a displacer beast.  DISQUIETUDE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [MindAffecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your spell warns of unseen dangers and untrustworthy allies. As you sing, your target eases away from her compatriots, doubt written on her face. The affected subject restricts its movement to avoid any physical contact, even with allies. Any ally that wishes to touch the subject must make a successful melee touch attack to do so. The subject must stay 15 feet away from all other creatures. If, at the beginning of its turn, the creature is within 15 feet of any creature, it must ﬁrst move away (beyond 15 feet from any creature) before taking any action. If the subject cannot safely move that distance, it instead must take the total defense action and remain in its space.  DISRUPT UNDEAD, GREATER  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A black ray ﬁres from your outstretched hand,piercingandpassingthroughnearby undead. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. This spell functions like disrupt undead (PH 223), except that this ray deals 1d8 points of damage per caster level to any undead, to a maximum of 10d8. If the damage is sufﬁcient to destroy the ﬁrst target, then you can redirect the ray to another undead target within 15 feet of the ﬁrst target. If you make a successful ranged touch attack on the second target, that target takes half of the damage rolled for the ﬁrst target.  DISSONANT CHANT  Abjuration [Sonic] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 100-foot-radius emanation Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  DISSONANT CHORD  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes You emit a terrible, piercing note. The note pulsesintheair,radiatinglikeashockwave. It slams into nearby creatures and rattles loose objects. Creatures (other than you) in the affected area take 1d8 points of sonic damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8).  DISTORT SPEECH  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature  For the duration of this spell, the subject has a 50% chance to miscast spells that have verbal components, and any time the subject speaks (including the use of magic items activated by command words), there is a 50% chance that the utterance is completely incomprehensible and therefore ineffective.  DISTRACT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Thisspellarousesazestandappreciationfor lifeinthetargets.Thetargetsaredistracted as they study the shapes of the clouds, the textureoftreebark,thepatternscarvedinto a stone wall, the temperature and scent of a breeze—anythingandeverythinggetstheir attention, if just for a moment. The targets of this spell must succeed on a Will save or lose themselves to the urge to experience nearly everything. Failure indicates the creatures take a –4 penalty on all Concentration, Listen, Search, and Spot checks, and can take only a single standard or move action each round, but not both. Creatures with more than 6 HD are unaffected.  DISTRACT ASSAILANT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  A creature affected by this spell is ﬂat-footed until the beginning of its next turn. Material Component: The dried wing of a ﬂy.  DISTRACTING RAY  Abjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You create a distracting and discordant chant. Affected creatures that attempt spellcasting or other activities that require concentration must make Concentration checks (DC equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). The DCs of activities that already require Concentration checks, such as casting defensively, increase by 4. Creatures within the area gain a +4 bonus on saving throws against language-dependent effects.  By pointing and making a number of loud, nonsensicalsoundsyoureleasethepowerof the spell. The target attempts to speak, but spews forth only gibberish instead.  Buzzing under your breath like a ﬂy, you swatattheskyandtosstheﬂy’swinginyour hand into the air. The target of your spell becomesdistracted,startingatshadowsand looking about for unseen assailants.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Your intricate hand motions slow and then stop even as you begin chanting the arcane wordsthatunlockthespell’spower.Asyou conclude,yourdisembodiedwordscontinue on, growing both in tempo and volume.  Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  You blast a nearby creature with a multicolored ray. The ray explodes on contact to form a dizzying array of bizarre swirling and ﬂashing lights around the targeted creature. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. This ray attempts to undo magic as it is being cast. Used in the same manner as a counterspell (as a readied action), the ray interferes with the manipulation of divine or arcane magic by dazzling the target. If the ray successfully strikes a spellcaster, and that spellcaster is in the process of casting a spell, then the target spellcaster must make a Concentration check to avoid losing the spell. The DC of the Concentration check is equal to 17 + the level of the spell the target is casting.  DIVINE AGILITY  Transmutation Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No Calling aloud on the divine power of your deity, you imbue a living creature with agility and skill in combat.  69  You grant the subject a +10 enhancement bonus to Dexterity.  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DIVINE INSIGHT  Divination Level: Cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level or until discharged (D) Clutching the focus of your spells to your chest, you let your eyes ﬂutter shut. As you complete the short prayer you feel your deity’s presence ﬁll you with conﬁdence. Once during the spell’s duration, you can choose to use its effect. This spell grants you an insight bonus equal to 5 + your caster level (maximum bonus of +15) on any single skill check. Activating the effect requires an immediate action. You must choose to use the insight bonus before you make the check you want to modify. Once used, the spell ends. You can’t have more than one divine insight effect active on you at the same time.  DIVINE INTERDICTION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. +5 ft./2 levels) Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates or None (object); see text Spell Resistance: Yes or No (object); see text You shout out a plea, calling upon your deity to quell the power of another deity’s follower. This spell can be cast at a point in space, but the effect is stationary unless cast on a mobile object. The spell can be cast on a creature, and the effect then radiates from the creature and moves as it moves. A creature can attempt a Will save to negate the spell, and spell  70  resistance, if any, applies if the spell is cast on a creature. Divine interdiction interferes with a cleric’s connection to her divine source of power, resulting in a temporary loss of the ability to turn or rebuke creatures and loss of granted domain powers. Paladins, blackguards, and other classes capable of rebuking and turning also suffer a temporary loss of this ability. This affects the subject’s ability to channel energy through the use of a turn or rebuke attempt, and so also interferes with the use of many divine feats.  DIVINE PROTECTION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allies in a 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You call upon your holy powers to aid your companions and a golden light appears from above, bathing them with sparkling radiance. Allies gain a +1 morale bonus to their Armor Class and on saving throws.  DIVINE SACRIFICE  Evocation Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Giving up some of your life force to win the battle, you empower your next blow against your foe. Your ﬁrst attack each round for the duration of the spell deals an extra 5d6 points of damage if it hits, and you take 10 points of damage each time you make such an attack, whether or not the attack is successful.  DOLOROUS BLOW  Transmutation Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Alongingforbattleﬁllsyouasyoucomplete this spell. Upon touching the intended weapon,thefeelingfadesevenasadullred aura encompasses the weapon. For the duration of the spell, the weapon’s threat range is doubled, and its critical threats automatically conﬁrm, so every threat is a critical hit. The latter effect does not apply to any weapon that already has a magical effect related to critical hits. Multiple effects that increase a weapon’s threat range (such as this spell and the Improved Critical feat) don’t stack. You can’t cast this spell on a natural weapon, such as a claw.  DOOMTIDE  Illusion (Pattern) Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 80 ft. Effect: Eight 10-ft. cubes extending straight from you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youﬁllanareawithillusoryblack,creeping mist that vaguely resembles thousands of slender grasping tentacles. Creatures within the area must make Will saves or be dazed for 1 round. Any creature moving into the mist, or a creature that begins its turn in the mist, must succeed on a Will save or also be dazed for 1 round. The mist ﬁlling the area obscures all sight, including darkvision, beyond 5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has concealment. Creatures farther away have total concealment. When you cast the spell, you decide if the effect remains stationary or  Denied the power to turn undead by her foe’s divine interdiction, a cleric falls before a horde of undead  if its point of origin moves straight away from you at a rate of 10 feet per round. A moderate wind disperses the effect in 4 rounds; a strong wind disperses the mist in 1 round.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DOWNDRAFT  Evocation [Air] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (20ft. radius, 100 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Dropping the small carving in your hand to the ground, you crush it with your foot as you recite the last few words of the spell. In the distance you see a column of air turn a hazy gray. The air column then blasts toward the ground, and you hear a distant whoosh. Downdraft sends a column of turbulent air rushing toward the earth. Airborne creatures caught in the area of a downdraft must succeed on a Reﬂex save or immediately plummet up to 100 feet straight downward, taking falling damage (1d6 points of damage per 10 feet fallen) if the downdraft makes them hit the ground or collide with an object. Those who succeed on the Reﬂex save plummet only 50 feet. Creatures already on the ground must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be knocked prone by the spell. Material Component: A balsa-wood bird carving, which is crushed underfoot.  72  DRACONIC MIGHT  Transmutation Level: Paladin 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  DRAGON ALLY  Conjuration (Calling) Level: Dragon 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Effect: One called dragon of 18 HD or less This spell functions like lesser dragon ally, except you can call a single dragon of up to 18 HD. XP Cost: 250 XP.  DRAGON ALLY, GREATER  Conjuration (Calling) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Effect: One called dragon of 22 HD or less This spell functions like lesserdragonally,exceptyou can call a single dragon of up to 22 HD. XP Cost: 500 XP.  DRAGON ALLY, LESSER  Dragon ally summons a dragon to do your bidding, but only at a great price  Upon casting this spell, your ally’s face is coveredbrieﬂywithaﬁnepatternofyellow scales.Thescalesfade,butthegoldenradiance remains. The subject of the spell gains a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, Constitution, and Charisma. It also gains a +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Finally, it has immunity to magic sleep and paralysis effects. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  Conjuration (Calling) Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One called dragon of 15 HD or less Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youfeelsomeofyourlifeforcebeingpulled from you in the casting of the spell. A large dragon lands nearby. “You wish to discuss something?” it asks, eying your belongings. This spell calls a dragon. You can ask the dragon to perform one task in exchange for a payment from you. Tasks might range from the simple (ﬂy us across the chasm, help us ﬁght a battle) to the complex (spy on our enemies, protect us on our foray into the dungeon). You must be able to communicate with the dragon to bargain for its services.  Evocation [Good or Evil] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Using magic to mimic a dragon’s breath, you spew forth a gout of energy. You gain the ability to breathe a gout of energy as a standard action that mimics a dragon’s breath. Once you’ve used the breath attack, you must wait 1d4 rounds before doing so again. When you cast dragon breath, you choose one true dragon whose breath you’re emulating. If you choose a chromatic dragon, then the spell gains the evil descriptor. If you choose a metallic dragon, then it gains the good descriptor. Particulars for the breath weapons of each of the true dragons are provided below.  Metallic Dragons Brass: 15-ft. cone of sleep, lasts 1d6 rounds; Will negates. Bronze: 30-ft. line of electricity, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Copper: 15-ft. cone of slow, lasts 1d6 rounds; Will negates. Gold: 15-ft. cone of ﬁre, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Silver: 15-ft. cone of paralysis, lasts 1d6 rounds; Fort negates. Arcane Material Component: A dragonscale of the appropriate color.  DRAGONSIGHT  Transmutation Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D) You cast this spell and your eyes enlarge and turn yellow and catlike, like those of a dragon. You gain the visual acuity of a dragon, including low-light vision, darkvision, and blindsense. You can see four times as well as a normal human in low-light conditions and twice as well in normal light. Your darkvision is effective out to 10 feet per caster level. You take half the normal penalties for distance on Spot checks. Your blindsense has a range of 5 feet per caster level. None of these effects stack with any low-light vision, darkvision, or blindsense you might already have. Focus: A dragon’s eye.  DRAGONSKIN  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level You say nothing, but make the motions in theprescribedpatternandholdthedragon’s scale aloft. Your ﬂesh erupts with hard, colorful scales. Your skin toughens and becomes scaly like that of a chromatic dragon, of a color that you select. You gain an enhancement bonus to natural armor equal to +1 per two levels (to a maximum of +5 at 10th level), as well as energy resistance 10 against the type of energy appropriate to the color you select: acid (black or green), cold (white), electricity (blue), or ﬁre (red). Your energy resistance increases to 20 at 10th level. Material Component: A dragon’s scale. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  CHAPTER 1  DRAGON BREATH  Chromatic Dragons Black: 30-ft. line of acid, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Blue: 30-ft. line of electricity, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Green: 15-ft. cone of acid, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Red: 15-ft. cone of ﬁre, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. White: 15-ft. cone of cold, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The summoned dragon requires payment for its services, which takes the form of coins, gems, or other precious objects the dragon can add to its hoard. This payment must be made before the dragon agrees to perform any services. The bargaining takes at least 1 round, so any actions by the creature begin in the round after it arrives. Tasks requiring up to 1 minute per caster level require a payment of 50 gp per HD of the called dragon. For a task requiring up to 1 hour per caster level, the creature requires a payment of 250 gp per HD. Long-term tasks (those requiring up to 1 day per caster level) require a payment of 500 gp per HD. Especially hazardous tasks require a greater gift, up to twice the given amount. A dragon never accepts less than the indicated amount, even for a nonhazardous task. At the end of its task, or when the duration bargained for elapses, the creature returns to the place it was called from (after reporting back to you, if appropriate and possible). XP Cost: 100 XP. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  DREAM CASTING  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting]; see text Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Casting Time: 1 hour Target: You and one dreamer Duration: 24 hours/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates; see text You complete the spell with a few last gesturesandarcanewords.Youfeelapressure inyourmindasyoubegintorelaytheintent of your dreaming contact. This spell functions like dream (PH 225), except as noted above and that you can alter the sleeping person’s dreams to produce a speciﬁc desired effect. The dreamer gets a Will saving throw to resist the additional effects of this spell; if the save succeeds, the dream casting spell can send only a message, in the manner of the dream spell. If the saving throw fails, you decide what additional effect the message carries. Fear: Your image in the dream is surrounded by intimidating imagery and an aura of power. For the duration of  73  Illus. by B. Gagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  the spell, any time the dreamer can see you or knows you are present, he is shaken. This is a compulsion and fear effect. Charm: Your image in the dream appears particularly helpful and kind. For the duration of the spell, the dreamer is under the effect of a charm monster spell. This is a charm effect. Rage: Your image in the dream taunts and harasses the dreamer. For the duration of the spell, any time the dreamer can see you or knows you are present, he preferentially attacks you if in a combat situation. The dreamer gains a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, attack rolls, ability checks, skill checks, and weapon damage rolls when attacking you while under this effect. This is a compulsion effect. Harrow: Your image in the dream behaves in a bizarre and irrational manner. For the duration of the spell, the dreamer behaves in an unusual manner, gaining two random traits from Table 4–24: One Hundred Traits (DMG 128), rerolling any results not pertinent to behavior. If the dreamer can see you or knows you are present, he is confused for 1 round/level.  DREAM SIGHT  Divination Level: Dream 6 Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: See text Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) In sleep your spirit rises to travel about and observe the world. You fall into a deep sleep while your spirit leaves your body invisibly in incorporeal form and travels to distant locations. Your spirit can move 100 feet per round, and can see and hear anything you could if you were in the same location. The spirit can be blocked by any spell that wards incorporeal creatures, and it can be detected and attacked in the same way as incorpo-  74  Dream sight gives a sleeping character the ability to pass through the world like a ghost  real creatures can. Your spirit can do nothing but move and observe—it cannot speak, attack, cast spells, or perform any other action. At the end of the spell, your spirit instantaneously returns to your body and you wake up. If your body is disturbed or attacked while your spirit is wandering, the spell ends immediately.  DROWN  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You speak the words and make the sign of thewave.Yourfoesputters,watergushing from his mouth, then collapses. You create water in the lungs of the subject, causing it to begin drowning (DMG 304) as if it had failed to continue holding its breath. The subject’s hit points immediately drop to 0, and it falls unconscious. In the next round, it loses another hit point (bringing its  hit points to –1) and is dying. In the following round, it dies. Coughing and other attempts by the subject to physically expel the water from its lungs are useless. However, another creature can stabilize the subject by making a DC 15 Heal check on the creature before it dies. Undead, constructs, creatures that do not need to breathe, and creatures that can breathe water are unaffected by this spell.  DROWN, MASS  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 9 Targets: One or more creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart. You speak the words and make the sign of the wave, indicating each of your foes in turn.Theysputterandpitchforward,water gushing from their mouths and nostrils. This spell functions like drown, except that it affects multiple creatures.  DUELWARD  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level or until discharged (D)  Abjuration [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One 1-foot length of tunnel with a diameter of up to 10 feet Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You scribe a spiral in the air with the diamond-tipped bit of charcoal, chanting thewordsofthespell.Immediatelythesides of the cavern begin to contract, sealing the passage behind you. You cause a 1-foot length of subterranean tunnel to constrict, “locking” it against others who might wish to traverse its length. This spell affects only naturally occurring tunnels or worked tunnels that are surrounded on all sides by unworked, natural, subterranean earth. You can affect any tunnel  EARTH REAVER  An earth lock spell causes a tunnel to constrict seconds before charging minotaurs reach the gap  The constriction takes 1 round to complete. Any Large or smaller object or creature that partially blocks the constriction point is pushed, unharmed, to one side or the other. (A creature can decide which way to move; an object moves randomly.) A Large or larger object or creature that blocks the constriction point prevents the spell from working until moved. You can freely pass through tunnels that you have secured with this spell. (The constriction opens and closes on your command, taking 1 round for  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  EARTH LOCK  Illus. by R. Spears  While a duelward spell is in effect, counterspelling is an immediate action for you, allowing you to counterspell even when it is not your turn without having previously readied an action. You also gain a +4 competence bonus on Spellcraft checks made to identify spells being cast. The ﬁrst time you successfully counterspell while the spell is in effect (whether you counterspell as an immediate action or not), duelward is discharged. Material Component: A miniature silk glove.  either process). A tunnel secured with earth lock can be bypassed by others in several ways. A DC 20 Escape Artist check allows the creature making the check to squeeze through the constriction but leaves it intact. A DC 25 Strength check breaks the constriction and ends the spell. A successful dispel magic or knock spell opens the constriction—the former by ending the spell and the latter by suppressing it for 10 minutes. If a creature burrows through the earth lock, the spell ends. The constricted tunnel can also be dug out normally. Identifying a tunnel secured with earth lock (as opposed to a tunnel that just ends) requires a DC 20 Search check. Material Component: A diamond chip worth at least 50 gp, embedded in a piece of charcoal.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Theairaroundyoucrackleswithmagical energy as you ﬁnish uttering the last syllables of the spell’s formula. You immediately feel as if your link to the arcane somehow has increased, ﬁlling you with conﬁdence and a sense of security.  whose diameter does not exceed 10 feet. A square-sided or rough tunnel can also be affected, as long as its diameter at the point where the spell is cast does not exceed 10 feet.  Withastern,commandingword,youpoint at a spot on the ground. An instant later, the earth at the indicated spot erupts in a shower of rock, dirt, and ﬁre. Creatures and objects within the area take 4d6 points of damage from the impact of the rock shards, as well as 3d6 points of ﬁre damage; no saving throw applies to the damage. Creatures in the area must also succeed on a Reﬂex saving throw or be knocked prone.  75  EARTHBIND  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your foe will reach you in seconds. You cast this spell, and yellow strips of magical energyloopaboutitswings,hamperingits ﬂight and dragging it to ground. You hinder the subject creature’s ability to ﬂy (whether through natural or magical means) for the duration of the spell. If the target fails its saving throw, its ﬂy speed (if any) becomes 0 feet. An airborne creature subjected to this spell falls to the ground as if under the effect of a feather fall spell. Even if a new effect would grant the creature the ability to ﬂy, that effect is suppressed for the duration of the earthbind spell. Earthbind has no effect on other forms of movement, or even on effects that might grant airborne movement without granting a ﬂy speed (such as jumping or levitate or air walk spells).  EARTHEN GRACE  Abjuration [Earth] Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yousprinklethespell’scomponentonyour target,causingitsskintomomentarilytake on the speckled gray look of granite. The smell of dust hangs heavily in the air. You grant the subject an afﬁnity for earth and stone. Any damage the subject takes from a stone or earthen source counts as nonlethal damage for the duration of the spell. Natural attacks by creatures made of earth or stone (such as stone golems), natural attacks by creatures of the earth subtype, and attacks by stone weapons (such as a  76  stone hammer or a sling stone) instead deal nonlethal damage, as does falling damage when the subject lands on rock or earth. When the nonlethal damage the subject has taken (from any source) equals the subject’s current hit points, the spell ends, and any further damage from a stone or earthen source causes damage normally. Material Component: A chunk of granite.  EARTHEN GRASP  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Animated earthen arm Duration: 2 rounds/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You raise your arm above your hand, your ﬁngers ﬂexed like talons. Nearby, an arm made of earth but as large as a person erupts from the ground, its hand grasping at the air. You bring forth from the ground an arm made of dense, compacted earth or soil that can grapple your foes. You can cause the arm to rise only out of earth, mud, grass, or sand, and the spell fails if you attempt to cast it in an area with the wrong materials (including stone). Treat the arm as a Medium creature, with a base attack bonus equal to your caster level and a Strength of 14 +2 per three caster levels (16 at 3rd level, 18 at 6th level, and so on). The arm doesn’t move from the square it appears in, but can make one grapple attempt per round against any creature in its square or any adjacent square. Doing so does not provoke attacks of opportunity. If the arm can target multiple creatures, you choose one. If you are unable to choose a target, the arm attacks a random creature within reach (possibly including your allies). Each round when it successfully pins a target, the hand deals lethal damage equal to 1d6 points + its Str modiﬁer. The earthen arm has AC 15, hardness 4, and 3 hit points per caster level. If reduced to 0 or fewer hit points, it crumbles to dust. Material Component: A miniature hand sculpted from clay.  EARTHFAST  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: One stone structure or rock formation, up to 25 cubic ft./level Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Gray bands extend from your ﬁngertips, wrapping themselves around the wall like a brace, strengthening it for the coming assault. You reinforce a rock formation or stone structure. The earthfast spell doubles the structure’s hit points and increases its hardness to 10. This spell does not function on constructs.  EASY CLIMB  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Vertical path 10 ft. wide and 20 ft. tall/level Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) By pushing upward with your hand and speaking in a commanding voice, you cause indentations to form in the surface you designate. You create a path of handholds and footholds up the surface of a cliff face, tree trunk, wall, or other vertical obstacle. This effect changes the surface to the equivalent of a very rough wall (Climb DC 10).  EASY TRAIL  Abjuration Level: Druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 40 ft. Area: 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  Divination Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Animal skull touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  The easy climb spell can create a path of escape where none existed before  You sweep your arm as if to push aside a branch and simultaneously call out for the plants around you to move aside. Obediently, the plants surrounding you oblige. Anyone in the area of the spell (including you) ﬁnds the undergrowth held aside while they pass. This effect essentially provides a trail through any kind of undergrowth, and you treat any trackless terrain as having a trail (PH 164). Once the effect of the spell passes, the plants return to their normal shape. The DC to track anyone who traveled within the area of this spell increases by 5 (the equivalent of hiding the trail). This spell has no effect on plant crea-tures (that is, they aren’t pushed or held aside by its effect).  EBON EYES  Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You feel, more than see, a black haze form at the corner of your eyes. Upon touching your intended subject the haze disappears andthecreature’seyesbecomeshroudedin blackness. The subject of this spell gains the ability to see normally in natural and  Illus. by E. Polak  You cast the spell and the animal skull in your hand glows green, the radiance fading quickly. You cast your perception intotheskullandseeyourownformholding it. You switch your viewpoint back and set the skull aside, able to eavesdrop and surprise any trespassers.  CHAPTER 1  ECHO SKULL  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  magical darkness, although it does not otherwise improve the subject’s ability to see in natural dark or shadowy conditions. The subject ignores the miss chance due to lack of illumination other than total darkness. While the spell is in effect, a jet-black ﬁlm covers the subject’s eyes, a visual effect that gives the spell its name. Material Component: A pinch of powdered black gemstone of any type.  You can see, hear, and speak through a tiny dried animal skull at any distance. As long as you and the skull remain on the same plane, you can see and hear as if you were standing where it is, and during your turn you can switch your perception from its location to your own or back again as a free action. Focus: A tiny dried animal skull.  ECTOPLASMIC ARMOR Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No  Withaﬁnalword,shimmeringtranslucent slime appears around the target and ﬁts to its form like a suit of plate.  77  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject of the spell gains a +5 armor bonus to AC, with an additional +1 to the bonus for every four caster levels you have (maximum +9 bonus at 16th level). This armor bonus applies only against incorporeal touch attacks. All other attacks ignore the armor bonus from ectoplasmic armor.  ECTOPLASMIC FEEDBACK  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: See text Ashimmeringsheathofenergysurrounds you, promising harm to incorporeal creatures that touch you. Any creature that hits you with an incorporeal touch attack takes 1d6 points of force damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10). If the attacker has spell resistance, it applies to this effect.  EFFULGENT EPURATION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One magic-absorbing sphere per caster level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Completing the powerful spell, you bring into being ﬂoating spheres of silver, like bubbles of mercury. When you cast this spell, you bring forth one ﬂoating, silvery sphere per caster level, each about the size of your head. These spheres hover around you to provide protection from magical effects. As a standard action, you can shift the spell’s effect (and thus all the spheres) to any other creature within  78  range. You can shift the effect once per round. Each of these spheres can absorb and completely negate any spell or spell-like ability, regardless of level, that directly targets the subject. The spheres do not automatically absorb all spells; the subject can choose whether or not to let them absorb any given spell cast upon it. (This option allows the creature to beneﬁt from helpful spells.) Area spells and spells that do not actually have a target cannot be absorbed. Once a sphere has absorbed a spell or spell-like ability, it simply fades away. Only spells and spell-like abilities of deiﬁc power can overcome the protection provided by effulgent epuration.  ELECTRIC JOLT  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A white-hot electric spark dances on your ﬁngertip and then bolts toward your target. You release a small stroke of electrical energy. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The spell deals 1d3 points of electricity damage.  ELECTRIC LOOP  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, each of which is adjacent to another target Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Spitting a harsh-sounding arcane word, you snap your ﬁngers, and lightning leaps among your foes. You create one small stroke of lightning that targets one creature per three  caster levels you possess (maximum four creatures). Each target must be in a square adjacent to another target. The spell deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to each target. A creature that fails its Reﬂex save must make a successful Will save or be stunned for 1 round. Material Component: A loop of copper wire and a magnet.  ELEMENTAL BODY  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level Drawing upon the power of the elemental planes,yourtransformyourbodyinaﬂash of light. You can transform your body into a particular type of elemental substance. You and your possessions appear to be made of that element, though in the same general shape and size as your normal appearance. You gain the following abilities when you cast elemental body: • You have the beneﬁts of the attune form spell (page 17) with respect to the appropriate element. If you choose a water body, for example, you can breathe normally on waterdominant planes. • You are immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning, and are not subject to extra damage from critical hits or ﬂanking. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. • Your creature type remains unchanged, so you are unaffected by spells that target elementals, but you gain the air, earth, ﬁre, or water subtype depending on the elemental substance you chose.  In addition, you gain the following exceptional abilities according to the element chosen: Air: Fly at your normal speed (perfect maneuverability), air mastery (airborne creatures take a –1 penalty on attack rolls and damage rolls against you).  EMERALD FLAME FIST Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature or object touched Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  ENERGIZED SHIELD, LESSER  Abjuration [see text] Level: Cleric 2, paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Shield touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Upon casting the spell, you gain the senses of animal creatures. You gain low-light vision and either blindsense out to 30 feet or scent (your choice). You also gain a +2 bonus on Listen and Spot checks.  Illus. by C. Frank  While picturing a certain kind of animal in your mind, you cry out in imitation of its mostcommoncall.Immediatelythereafter, you perceive your surroundings as the animal you imagined would.  Abjuration [see text for lesser energized shield] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 This spell functions like lesser energized shield, except that the energy resistance is 10 and damage dealt is 2d6.  A silver aura surrounds the touchedshieldforamoment before it appears to transform into the chosen type of energy. The shield hums with power.  EMBRACE THE WILD Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  ENERGIZED SHIELD  CHAPTER 1  Crackling emerald ﬂames wreathe your hand as you ﬁnish the spell, lighting the area around you in a green glow.  action to attempt a DC 15 Reﬂex save, which extinguishes the ﬂames and ends the spell. You can use this spell to attack an object. Nonmagical, unattended objects are automatically engulfed in green ﬂame and take 3d6 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level each round. SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Earth: Earth mastery (you gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if both you and your foe touch the ground), push (you can start a bull rush maneuver without provoking attacks of opportunity), +3 natural armor bonus to AC. Fire: Fire immunity, burn (those you hit in melee and those who attack you with natural weapons must make a Reﬂex save or catch ﬁre, with a save DC equal to that of a ﬁre elemental of the same size). Water: Swim at your normal speed, water mastery (you gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if both you and your opponent touch water), drench (you can use your elemental form to put out nonmagical open ﬂames and dispel magical ﬁre you touch as if casting dispel magic at your caster level). Theelementalbody spell has the descriptor of the element you choose. So, if you choose a body of ﬁre, elemental body is a ﬁre spell. Material Component: A bit of the element in question from a plane other than the one where the spell is being cast.  Emerald ﬂame ﬁst sends a strong message to your foes  One of your hands bursts into an aura of brilliant emerald ﬂame, shedding light equal to that of a torch. With a standard action, you can make a melee touch attack that deals 3d6 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20). The creature you touch is engulfed by the ﬁercely hot aura of ﬂame. Each round at the beginning of its turn, the creature is allowed a Fortitude save to prevent further damage, but on a failed save the creature is still engulfed in the ﬂaming aura and again takes 3d6 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20). An engulfed creature that fails its Fortitude save can use a full-round  When this spell is cast, the shield touched appears to be made entirely out of one type of energy (ﬁre, cold, electricity, acid, or sonic). Whoever bears the shield gains resistance 5 against the chosen energy type. Additionally, if the wielder successfully hits someone with the shield with a shield bash attack, the victim takes 1d6 points of the appropriate energy damage in addition to the normal shield bash damage. The energy type must be chosen when the spell is cast and cannot be changed during the duration of the spell. The energy resistance overlaps (and does not stack) with resist elements. A given shield cannot be the subject of more than one lesser energized shield or energized shield spell at the same time.  79  The descriptor of this spell is the same as the energy type you choose when you cast it.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ENERGY EBB  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youpointyourﬁngeranduttertheincantation, releasing a black needle of crackling negativeenergythatsuppressesthelifeforce of any living creature it strikes.  This spell functions like enervation (PH 226), except the creature struck gains negative levels over an extended period. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If the attack succeeds, the subject initially gains one negative level, then continues to gain another negative level each round thereafter as its life force slowly bleeds away. The drain can be stopped only by a successful DC 23 Heal check or the application of a heal, restoration, or greater restoration spell. Each round after the ﬁrst, on your turn, the affected creature can attempt a Fortitude saving throw to end the effect. If you strike an undead creature, that creature gains 4d4×5 temporary hit points that last for up to 1 hour.  ENERGY IMMUNITY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6, druid 6, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Asenseofsecurityﬁllsyouasyoucomplete the spell. As you touch the intended target ofthespell,thefeelinglingersforamoment before fading.  80  This abjuration grants a creature and its equipment complete immunity to damage from one of the ﬁve energy types—acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic. Energy immunity absorbs only hit point damage, so the recipient could still suffer side effects such as drowning in acid, being deafened by a sonic attack, or becoming immobilized in ice (and thus helpless). Energy immunity overlaps protection from energy and resist energy. As long as energy immunity is in effect, the other spells absorb no damage.  ENERGY SPHERES  Evocation [Acid, Cold, Electricity, Fire, Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Five ﬂoating spheres Duration: 1 round/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes; see text You toss each of the marbles into the air, making the incantation as you do so. Each marbleturnsadifferentcolor—palegreen, white,blue,red,andviolet—andsettlesinto orbit around your head. You create a circle of ﬁve colored spheres that orbit your head at a distance of 1 foot. These spheres provide as much light as a torch and can be used offensively or defensively. Each sphere corresponds to one of the ﬁve types of energy (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, sonic). If used to attack, on your turn as a standard action you can direct one or more spheres to strike a creature or creatures in range, no two of which are more than 30 feet apart. Each sphere deals 5 points of energy damage per ﬁve caster levels (maximum 20 points of damage) to a single creature, so an 11th-level caster’s sphere deals 10 points of energy damage. The subject can make a Reﬂex save for half damage against each sphere. If you are attacked with an effect that causes energy damage, and the sphere of that type of energy is still present, you can have that sphere absorb some of that energy damage. Each sphere grants you energy resistance 5 per ﬁve caster  levels. If a sphere is used to absorb damage, that sphere is destroyed. When used to attack a creature with spell resistance, make one spell resistance roll for all spheres that attack the target in a round. Success or failure applies to all spheres striking the creature that round. Material Component: Five glass marbles.  ENERGY TRANSFORMATION FIELD  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 4 rounds Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You hold the eye in your palm, sprinkle it with blood and diamonds, and speak the words. Slowly it rises from your hand, emitting a soft beam that illuminates the chosen area. Then it disappears, and you place the spell within the magic trap. You create a lingering zone of transformative magic that absorbs magic energy from magic items or spellcasting and uses it to power another spell tied to that location. For example, you could have an energy transformation ﬁeld tied to a summon monster V spell that would summon a monster when the ﬁeld had absorbed enough magic. The ﬁeld absorbs the magic of spells cast, spell-like or supernatural abilities that are activated, and magic items used within its dimensions. Each source of magic provides spell levels of energy to the ﬁeld equal to the spell level of the effect used. Supernatural abilities that emulate spells provide energy equal to the spell level of the effect. Supernatural abilities that do not emulate spells provide energy equal to the HD of the creature using the ability. For example, a cast ﬁreball spell or a charge from a wand of ﬁreball would add three spell levels to the ﬁeld’s store, a potion of cure light wounds would add one, and a wish from a ring of three wishes would add nine. Items that don’t have a clearly deﬁned spell level (such as the effects  has an equal chance of absorbing a spell effect in that area. Material Component: Three drops of your blood, an eye from any humanoid, and 5,000 gp worth of powdered diamond. XP Cost: 250 XP.  ENERGY VORTEX  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [see text] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft. Targets: All creatures within a 20-ft.radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Energy wells up inside you and explodes outward in a furious burst. When you cast energy vortex, you choose one of four energy types: acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre. A blast of that energy type bursts in all directions from you, dealing 1d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20) to nearby creatures other than you. If you are willing to take the damage yourself, you deal twice as  This gnome druid chose to cast a cold version of energy vortex  Illus. by R. Horsley  tion of its previous casting has expired. If a linked spell requires concentration to maintain, the ﬁeld expends one spell level for every hour of concentration (the ﬁeld’s concentration is interrupted only by its complete destruction). Spells that require a target will target the living creature nearest to the ﬁeld. Typical spells linked to an energy transformation ﬁeld are blindness/deafness,ﬁreball,suggestion,summonmonster, or wall of force. Spells that have a costly material component or an XP cost cannot be linked to a ﬁeld, but those with a costly focus can if the focus object is present within the ﬁeld (typically sealed into a wall or in a secret compartment). Only Mordenkainen’s disjunction, limited wish, wish, or similar spells can destroy the energy transformation ﬁeld. Spells of lower level, such as dispel magic and greater dispel magic, are absorbed by it, and an antimagic ﬁeld prevents it from absorbing magical energy within the ﬁeld but does not otherwise hamper this spell. If two or more ﬁeld spells share an overlapping area, each ﬁeld  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  of most rods) use the prerequisite caster level needed to create that item (so an immovable rod would provide two spell levels every time it was activated because of its levitate prerequisite). Effects that are absorbed give no indication of where the magic went; they simply vanish. The ﬁeld absorbs only magic that is actually used within its area. Ongoing magical effects that enter the area, including spells cast from outside the area into the ﬁeld or continually functioning items such as a +1 mace, are often visibly reduced, but do not have their actual effects hindered. For example, a continual ﬂame would dim slightly, but its overall magic would not be affected. An energy transformation ﬁeld has a single spell linked to it. When the ﬁeld has absorbed spell levels equal to the spell level of its linked spell, it automatically casts that spell at a point within the ﬁeld designated by you at the time of the casting of the ﬁeld. This expends those absorbed spell levels (although unused levels remain until they are used or expire). The cast spell functions as if cast by you in terms of duration and all level-based spell effects. Absorbed spell levels fade at a rate of one per day if not used. The ﬁeld automatically triggers its linked spell if it has enough stored spell levels and the dura-  81  much damage. You don’t get a Reﬂex save, but spell resistance applies, as do any resistances and immunities you have to the energy type. The descriptor of this spell is the same as the energy type you choose when you cast it.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ENERVATING BREATH Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  Your breath weapon explodes from your mouth, brilliant but mixed with sharp spikes of living darkness. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you can modify your breath weapon so that it is laced with negative energy. In addition to the normal energy damage your breath weapon deals, creatures that fail their saving throws against the breath weapon gain 2d4 negative levels. If the subject gains at least as many negative levels as it has Hit Dice, it dies. Each negative level gives a creature the following penalties: –1 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, skill checks, ability checks, and effective level (for determining the power, duration, DC, and other details of spells or special abilities). Additionally, a spellcaster loses one spell or spell slot from her highest available level. Assuming the subjects survive, they regain lost levels after a number of hours equal to your caster level. Ordinarily, negative levels have a chance of permanently draining the subject’s level, but the negative levels from enervating breath don’t last long enough to do so. If an undead creature is caught within the breath weapon, it gains 2d4×5 temporary hit points before taking damage from the breath weapon. These temporary hit points last for up to 1 hour.  82  ENHANCE FAMILIAR  Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Familiar touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) After you touch the target familiar, the creature perks up and appears more alert. You infuse your familiar with vigor, granting it a +2 competence bonus on saves, attack rolls, and melee damage rolls, as well as a +2 dodge bonus to Armor Class.  ENHANCE WILD SHAPE Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  You call upon the primordial energies of nature to ﬁll you with the raw power of nature. A feral feeling grows within you, seeking release. This spell infuses your wild shape ability with magical energy, magnifying and enhancing its power. The type of enhancement must be chosen at the time the spell is cast and cannot be changed once the spell is in effect. The next time you activate your wild shape ability (during the duration of enhance wild shape), this spell enhances your new form in the way you selected. The enhancement to your wild shape remains as long as you stay in that form (or until the spell’s duration expires) but does not apply to your next wild shape form. If you do not activate your wild shape ability during the duration of enhance wild shape, the spell has no effect. You select one of the following enhancements when you cast this spell. • Assume the form of a plant with your next wild shape.  • Gain the extraordinary abilities of the new form. • The new form assumed is stronger than normal and gains a +2 bonus to Strength. • The new form assumed is more agile than normal and gains a +2 bonus to Dexterity. • The new form assumed is healthier than normal and gains a +2 bonus to Constitution. A druid can be affected by more than one enhance wild shape spell at a time, but a different wild shape enhancement must be chosen each time.  ENLARGE PERSON, GREATER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Range: Touch Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  Yourintendedsubjectbeginstogrowrapidly as you complete the spell. This spell functions like enlarge person (PH 226), except as noted above.  ENRAGE ANIMAL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One animal Duration: Concentration +1 round/ level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Youfeelinexplicablyangryasyounearthe conclusionofthespell’scasting.Thefeeling subsidesslightlyasyoureleasethespellinto your target. Enrage animal affects only creatures of the animal type and bestows a +4 morale bonus to Strength and Constitution, a +2 morale bonus on Will saves, and a –2 penalty to Armor Class. This effect is otherwise identical to a barbarian’s rage (PH 25), except that the animal is not fatigued at the end of the rage.  ENTANGLING STAFF  Youcastthespellandapurpleglowappears in your mark’s eyes. You hold out your hand and demand the object it holds in a compelling voice.  ENTICE GIFT  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, Greed 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)  Entangling staff makes a simple piece of wood into a surprisingly versatile weapon  You enchant a creature so that it feels suddenly compelled to give you what it is holding when you cast this spell. On the creature’s next action, it moves as close to you as it can get in a single round and offers you the object as a standard action. This spell allows you to act out of turn and accept the “gift” if the creature reaches you to hand you the object (assuming you have a free hand and can accept it). The subject defends itself normally and acts as it wishes on subsequent rounds, including attempting to get the object back if desired. If the subject is prevented from doing as the spell compels, the spell has no effect. For example, if the subject is paralyzed and cannot move or drop the item, nothing happens.  ENVELOPING COCOON Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, M  A cocoon of force encloses a creature of size Large or smaller, containing it for the spell’s duration or until the cocoon is destroyed. The cocoon has hardness 10 and 10 hit points per caster level. The enveloping cocoon prevents the creature trapped inside from moving or casting spells with somatic components. The cocoon is too conﬁning to permit effective attacks with anything larger than a natural or light weapon (and the creature inside can attack only the cocoon in any event). You can attach a second spell to the cocoon by casting it at the cocoon. When the enveloping cocoon spell ends or is dismissed, the attached spell automatically affects the creature inside, with no save allowed (although spell resistance, if any, still applies). If the cocoon is destroyed before it is dismissed or the spell duration ends, the attached spell is wasted. Any of the following spells from this book can be attached to an enveloping cocoon: infestation of maggots, languor, miasma, and phantasmal disorientation. In addition, a cocoon can be used in conjunction with these spells from the Player’s Handbook: baleful polymorph, blight, contagion, dominate animal, ﬂame strike, and poison (the subject fails the initial save but can attempt the second save). Material Component: A live caterpillar.  Illus. by M. Phillippi  Each time you successfully strike a foe with the staff (a normal melee attack), you deal normal damage and can attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking attacks of opportunity. This grapple attempt does not require a separate touch attack. You gain a +8 bonus on grapple checks you cause by striking a foe with the entangling staff. You can attempt to grapple creatures up to one size category larger than you. If your grapple check succeeds, your quarterstaff’s vines constrict your foe, dealing 2d6 points of damage (you can choose to deal nonlethal damage instead of normal damage if you wish). You then have two choices: Release: You release your opponent from the grapple. Some vines remain clinging to your foe, leaving it entangled for the duration of the spell. You can attack different enemies in later rounds with the staff, potentially grappling and constricting or entangling them. Maintain: You maintain your hold. In subsequent rounds, you deal constriction damage with a successful grapple check. You can then choose to release or maintain the hold again. Focus: A quarterstaff.  Crushingacaterpillarbetweenyourﬁngers, you create a tight cocoon of shimmering blue-green energy around your foe.  CHAPTER 1  Rapping your staff with a knuckle, you cause it to sprout wriggling vines that grab and lash at the air.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Cocoon of force around one Large or smaller creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Quarterstaff touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Yes (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Target: One creature Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  83  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ERADICATE EARTH  Abjuration [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 40 ft. Area: 40-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes  ETHEREAL BREATH Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  You grasp the stone ﬁrmly and point your ﬁst outward. You feel the stone vanish, and a huge,silentexplosionripples through the air. A shock wave radiates from you, seismically damaging all nearby creatures that have the earth subtype. Any such creature that is within the area of the spell takes 1d8 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d8). Material Component: A small stone.  You infuse yourself with the essence of a prehistoric raptor. New sensations assault youasyounoticesounds,smells,andother elements of your surroundings that you could not perceive before. Your physical appearance does not change. Your speed increases to 60 feet (if it is already 60 feet or faster, it does not change), and you gain a +8 bonus on Hide, Jump, Listen, Spot, and Survival checks. You also gain the scent ability (MM 314).  84  ETHEREAL CHAMBER  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One ethereal creature Du ration: 1 minute/ level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes You pinch a piece of glass between your ﬁngers and as it crumbles to nothingness, a glassyprisonspringsinto being.  ESSENCE OF THE RAPTOR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  they were material, and does not affect material creatures in its area.  After the casting of ethereal breath, a dragon’s breath weapon affects incorporeal creatures  You exhale a blast of ﬁre down the corridor, but none of the furnishings take any damage. On another plane of existence, a hordeofetherealmaraudersisnownothing more than smoldering meat. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you can modify your breath weapon to manifest on the Ethereal Plane instead of on the Material Plane. (You must be on the Material Plane, or on another plane with a coexistent Ethereal Plane, for this spell to function.) Your breath weapon affects ethereal creatures as if  You create a translucent prison of pure crystalline force around a target on the Ethereal Plane. You must be able to see or otherwise target the creature you wish to affect. The subject affected by the chamber cannot move on either the Ethereal Plane or its coterminous planes for the duration of the spell but is otherwise unaffected. The subject cannot move onto another plane while inside the chamber, including the Material Plane. The subject within the crystalline prison cannot make physical attacks or be attacked and is unaffected by most spells and supernatural abilities. Gaze attacks and sonic spells function through the walls of the crystalline prison, but a creature within the chamber gains a +2 bonus on saving throws. The target of ethereal chamber can break the crystalline prison by making a Strength check (DC 10 + caster level). A disintegrate spell destroys an ethereal chamber. Material Component: A piece of translucent glass.  ETHEREAL MOUNT  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One quasi-real mount, plus one additional mount/2 levels Your spell draws ether into form, creating a misty mount for you to ride.  Necromancy [Evil, Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 feet Target: Living creatures Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast this spell and your eyes begin to tingle, brimming with dark energy. You shootaglanceatyourrival,andshefreezes in her tracks from your malignant glare. Immediately upon completion of the casting of this spell, you target a living creature within range with your glare; that creature becomes paralyzed with fear for 1d8 rounds. You must be able to see the creature, and it must be able to see you (though it need not meet your gaze).  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Ranged weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) As you complete the complicated ritual of thespellyouseeinyourmind’seyethevital areas of your favored enemy’s anatomy. All rolls made to conﬁrm critical threats by the target weapon against your favored enemies automatically succeed, so every threat is a critical hit. The affected weapon also ignores any miss chance due to concealment whenever you ﬁre at a favored enemy (unless the target has total concealment, in which case the normal miss chance applies). If the ranged weapon or the projectile ﬁred has any magical effect or property related to critical hits, this spell has no effect on it.  EXCAVATE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One 5-ft.-by-5-ft. opening, 1 ft./level deep Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You toss the bit of earth against the wall and it glitters and burns as it strikes the stone. The rock vaporizes where it hits and apassageopensbeforeyou,burrowinginto the wall. As with passwall (PH 259), this spell allows you to create a passage through  EXPEDITIOUS RETREAT, SWIFT  CHAPTER 1  EVIL GLARE  EXACTING SHOT  wooden, plaster, or stone walls, but not through metal or harder materials. If a wall’s thickness is more than 1 foot per caster level, then a single excavate spell simply makes a niche or short tunnel with the stated dimensions. Several excavate spells can be used in succession to breach very thick walls by forming a continuing passage. Unlike passwall, excavate is an instantaneous effect that does not end and cannot be dispelled; any passage it creates is permanent. Material Component: A pinch of excavated earth.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like phantom steed (PH 260), except as noted here. You call into being one or more quasi-real mounts. These mounts accept only you and those that you designate as riders. The mounts appear as horses or any other commonly ridden mounts, but they have a foggy, almost translucent nature, and their colors shift across the spectrum over time. These mounts have AC 18 (–1 size, +4 natural armor, +5 Dex), and hit points equal to 10 + your caster level. They do not ﬁght and have no attacks. If reduced to 0 hit points, an ethereal mount melts into the ethereal fog from which it came. An ethereal mount has a speed of 240 feet on the Ethereal Plane and can carry its rider’s weight plus 10 pounds per level. (If the Deep Ethereal is used in your cosmology, then the amount of time to reach destinations is halved while on an ethereal mount.)  Once per round after that for the duration of the spell, you can target another creature with your glare as a standard action. You can’t target the same creature twice with a single casting of the spell, regardless of the outcome of its saves.  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Duration: 1 round  In a breathless voice you call out, as if you were already running a race. This spell functions like expeditious retreat (PH 228), except as noted above.  EXPLOSIVE CASCADE  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: One 5-ft. square/level, all of which must be connected in one continuous path (S) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdthemetaltubeoutfromyourbody and cast the spell. A bright ball of ﬂame manifests and skips across the battleﬁeld, immolating targets in its path. You create a path of ﬂame when you cast this spell. Anything along this path takes 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to all creatures and objects it touches. The ﬂame lights up the area as if it were a torch, and small sparks and decaying ﬂames remain in the area for 1 round, shedding light as candles but dealing no damage. A creature or object can  85  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  be affected only once by each casting of this spell. If the damage from the ﬂame destroys an interposing barrier, the ﬂame can move beyond the barrier if it has area remaining. Material Component: Bat guano, sulfur, and copper packed into a metal tube with one closed end.  EXTEND TENTACLES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  Illus. by J. Jarvis  Youwriggleyourtentaclesinacomplicated choreography of movement, and your tentacles lengthen. This spell lengthens your tentacles, increasing the reach of your tentacle attacks by 5 feet. The tentacles attack as normal. If you do not already have tentacles, the spell has no effect on you.  EXTRACT WATER ELEMENTAL  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Horriﬁc but effective, extract water elemental kills a foe by turning the water in its body into a separate creature  86  Callingupontheessenceofelementalwater, you surround your target creature with a swirling blue and red aura. The aura seeps into the creature a moment before water spurts forth from its pores. It cries out in pain. This brutal spell causes the targeted creature to dehydrate horribly as the moisture in its body is forcibly extracted through its eyes, nostrils, mouth, and pores. This deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6), or half damage on a successful Fortitude save. If the targeted creature is slain by this spell, the extracted moisture is transformed into a water elemental of a size equal to the slain creature (up to Huge). The water elemental is under your control, as if you summoned it, and disappears after 1 minute. This spell has no effect on living creatures with the ﬁre subtype.  EYE OF THE HURRICANE  Abjuration [Air] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 40 ft. Area: 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on you, with 10-ft.-radius quiet area centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Your voice trails off into whispers as you near the end of the spell’s complex ritual. The whispers begin to build upon one another, echoing in the air around you, swirling and twisting until they become a steadycacophony.Thewindgathersspeed, creating a spherical vortex around you. With this spell, you create a swirling miniature storm that provides a measure of protection, but leaves you and those near you unaffected. The storm that surrounds you has hurricane-force winds spinning in a circle with you at the center. Normal ranged attacks through the hurricane’s windy area are impossible, and even heavier projectiles such as siege weapons and giant boulders take a –8 penalty on the attack roll. Creatures who move inside the spell’s area suffer effects depending on their size and whether they’re airborne. Each creature must make a saving throw at the beginning of its turn or when it enters the affected area.  Divination (Scrying) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Unlimited Effect: Magical sensor Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Yourinvocationcreatesaminiatureﬂoating eye of faintly glowing blue energy. Spying yourenemyfromthesafetyofyourmagical sensor, you unleash your spell. This spell functions like arcane eye (PH 200), except as noted here. You can cast  EYES OF THE KING  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Hunger 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Unlimited Effect: Magical sensor Duration: Concentration + 5 rounds, up to 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Letting a bit of bat fur loose to ﬂoat on the air,yousummonhuge,glowinggreenbats to serve as your eyes. You summon four ﬁendish dire bats (MM 62) that blaze with a faint ghoulgreen light (they glow as bright as a candle). These ﬁendish dire bats have damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite good attack that provides a +4 bonus on one damage roll. The bats allow you to see through their eyes, from their perspective, using your own visual senses. If you have darkvision, low-light vision, or spells cast that enhance your visual senses, such as true seeing or see invisibility, you continue to gain the beneﬁt of those abilities or spells through the eyes of your bat minions. The bats also give you the beneﬁt of their blindsense ability for the purpose of viewing their surroundings for the duration of the spell. You can summon the bats at any point you can see, but they can then travel outside your line of sight without hindrance. Even while outside your line of sight, they follow your mental directions on where to explore. The  dire bats travel together, never separating by more than 40 feet. They ﬂy with a speed of 40 feet if viewing an area ahead as a human would (primarily looking at the ﬂoor) or at half speed (speed 20 feet) if examining the ceiling and walls as well as the ﬂoor ahead. The bats can travel in any direction as long as the spell lasts. You must concentrate to control the dire bats. If you do not concentrate, the bats move to attack the closest active creature. Once concentration lapses, the spell ends 5 rounds later. Material Component: A bit of bat fur.  FAITH HEALING  CHAPTER 1  EYE OF POWER  any spell of 3rd level or lower that has a range other than personal through the eye. Any spell so cast functions as though it had been cast from the eye’s location rather than yours. Casting any spell of higher than 3rd level through the eye not only produces no effect (though the spell is still expended), but it destroys the eye of power and ends the spell. Unlike an arcane eye, an eye of power is visible and corporeal, so it can be destroyed. The eye is a Fine object with AC 18 and 77 hit points. It uses your save bonuses for saving throws. Material Component: A bit of bat fur.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Medium or smaller creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked 1d4×10 feet away from the eye of the hurricane’s center and take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet traveled in this manner. Creatures blown away are knocked prone as well. Flying creatures are blown back 2d6×10 feet and take 2d6 points of nonlethal damage. Large creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked prone by the force of the wind. Flying creatures are instead blown back 1d6×10 feet. Huge creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be checked. Flying creatures are instead blown back 1d6×5 feet. Gargantuan and Colossal creatures can move through the spell’s area without adverse consequences. Even creatures that succeed on their saving throws must attempt them again whenever they start a turn inside the spell’s area or whenever they move back into it. The spell’s area is effectively a sphere. Although the area is centered on you, you’re not within the wind. If you move, the eye of the hurricane moves as well to keep you in the center. If you cast eye of the hurricane so that creatures are inside the eye when the spell begins, they must make Fortitude saves when your movement brings the area of wind upon them. Thereafter, if you move the spell area into a square occupied by another creature, that creature makes a Fortitude save at the beginning of its next turn (assuming the windy area of the spell is still on it).  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youplaceyourhandsonyourloyalacolyte and blue-silver radiance discharges from yourhands.Thehorrendouswoundsacross his chest heal, leaving no scar. When laying your hand upon a living creature, you channel positive energy that cures 8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (up to +5). The spell works only on a creature that worships the same deity as you. A target with no deity or a different deity from yours is unaffected by the spell, even if the target would normally be harmed by positive energy.  FALSE GRAVITY  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You clatter the magnets in your hand and set your foot on the wall. Your second step carriesyouontothewall,andyoucanwalk up it with ease.  87  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject of this spell can travel on any solid surface as though that surface possessed its own gravity. For example, the subject could walk or even run up a wall as though the wall were a perfectly level ﬂoor. The subject can switch “down” as often as it likes during the spell’s duration, though only once per round, as a free action. Unattended objects fall, as normal. The subject of false gravity can ﬂy by choosing a solid surface and letting itself fall through the air toward it. A character “ﬂying” in this fashion moves at 30 feet per round and can make one turn, in any direction, once per round, by redeﬁning its personal gravity. A creature falling in this fashion loses all “downward” momentum when it changes its gravity. Material Component: A pair of magnets.  Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One container or garment with a pocket touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  When you cast this spell, a garment or container becomes a safe haven for a Tiny or smaller familiar. The spell turns the target pocket into a comfortable extradimensional space (about 1 cubic foot). The familiar can ﬁt inside the space without creating any noticeable bulge in the item. Whenever the familiar is touching you, you can whisk it inside the space as a free action by speaking a command word chosen by you when the spell is cast. If the familiar can speak, it can command itself inside. As a free action, you can  expires or if the spell ends abnormally (as above), the familiar appears in your space unharmed. Material Component: A tiny golden needle and a strip of ﬁne cloth given a half twist and fastened at the ends.  FANGS OF THE VAMPIRE KING  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Assassin 3, blackguard 3, Deathbound 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  Hissing an evil laugh, you sprout sharp fangs to drain the blood of your foes. You grow vampirelike fangs that allow you to make bite attacks as a natural attack. Your bite attack deals 1d6 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer, and 1 point of Constitution damage. If you make a full attack with other weapons, you can make a bite attack as a natural secondary attack (–5 penalty on the attack roll).  FAMILIAR POCKET  You move your hand along the mouth of the pocket intended for your familiar, and a line of glowing white energy follows in its wake. The glow fades, and the space seemsstrangelylargerinsidethananormal pocket.  88  call the familiar forth or it can leave the space on its own. Once inside, the familiar has total cover and total concealment, and as a free action, you or the familiar can further seal the space to make it airtight and  FANTASTIC MACHINE Fangs of the vampire king turns a spellcaster into a bloodsucking horror  waterproof. The air supply inside the sealed space lasts for 1 hour, but with the pocket unsealed, the familiar can remain inside indeﬁnitely. The familiar cannot attack or cast spells from within the space, but can use supernatural or spell-like abilities as normal (provided they don’t require line of sight, which the pocket blocks). You continue to gain the special ability granted by your familiar. While inside the pocket, the familiar continues to beneﬁt from the share spells ability as if it were adjacent to you. The spell ends if the familiar pocket is placed within or taken into another extradimensional space (such as a portable hole). If your familiar is within the pocket when the spell duration  Conjuration [Creation] Level: Craft 6, Gnome 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A 10-ft. machine Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Your spell generates an illusory, manyarmed,noisy,massivemechanicalconstruct of impressive appearance. This spell creates a bizarre, but useful, machine that you can command to perform any simple, physical task that can be described in twenty-ﬁve words or less. You can order the machine to perform the same task over and over, but you can’t change the task. You must specify the task when you cast the spell. The machine always acts on your turn  Conjuration [Creation] Level: Craft 9  This spell functions like fantastic machine, but you can concentrate on controlling the machine’s every action or specify a simple program, such as to collect all the logs in an area and stack them in a neat pile, plow a ﬁeld, drive piles, or the like. The machine can perform only fairly simple physical tasks. Directing the machine’s actions or changing its programmed movement is a standard action for you. The machine always acts on your turn in the initiative order. (It can act during the turn you cast the spell.) Except where noted below, the machine functions as a Large animated object (MM 13) constructed from adamantine. It trundles over the ground at  FAVOR OF THE MARTYR Necromancy Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One willing creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Calling upon the saints of your order, you imbue the person in need with the power to resist the dire forces arrayed against you. The subject gains immunity to nonlethal damage, charm and compulsion effects, and attacks that function speciﬁcally by causing pain, such as the wrack spell (see page 243). It is further immune to effects that would cause it to be dazed, exhausted, fatigued, nauseated, sickened, staggered, or stunned. The subject remains conscious at –1 to –9 hit points and can take a single action each round while in that state, and does not lose hit points for acting. If any of the above conditions were in effect on  the subject at the time of casting, they are suspended for the spell’s duration. (Thus, an unconscious subject becomes conscious and functional.) When the spell ends, any effects suspended by the spell that have not expired in the interim (such as the fatigued condition, which normally requires 8 hours of rest to recover from) return. Effects that expired during the duration of this spell do not resume when it ends. In addition to these effects, the subject gains the beneﬁt of the Endurance feat for the duration of the spell.  FAVORABLE SACRIFICE  CHAPTER 1  FANTASTIC MACHINE, GREATER  a speed of 60 feet. It can swim or ﬂy at a speed of 20 feet (poor). It has 16 HD, 88 hit points, AC 20 (–1 size, +11 natural), and hardness 20. Its saving throw modiﬁers are Fortitude +5, Reﬂex +5, and Will +0. The machine has a Strength of 22. A light load for the machine is up to 346 pounds, a medium load is 347–692 pounds, and a heavy load is 693–1,040 pounds. The machine can ﬂy or swim only when lightly loaded. The machine can lift a weight of up to 2,080 pounds to a height of 15 feet. It can push or drag 5,200 pounds. It can excavate 20,000 pounds of loose rock each minute (which is sufﬁcient to clear a 5-by-5-by-5-foot space in 1 round). It can excavate sand or loose soil at twice that rate. The machine makes slam attacks with an attack bonus of +17/+12 for 1d8+9 points of damage. It deals triple slam damage (3d8+27) against stone or metal. The machine can hurl Small rocks (if any are at hand) with an attack bonus of +12/+7. Its range increment is 150 feet, and it can throw a rock up to 10 range increments. A thrown rock deals 2d6+9 points of damage.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  in the initiative order. (It can act during the turn you cast the spell.) The machine functions as a Large animated object (MM 13). It trundles over the ground at a speed of 40 feet. It can swim or ﬂy at a speed of 10 feet (clumsy). It has 22 hit points, AC 14 (–1 size, +5 natural), and hardness 10. Its saving throw modiﬁers are Fortitude +1, Reﬂex +1, Will –4. The machine has a Strength of 16. A light load for the machine is up to 172 pounds; a medium load is 173–346 pounds; and a heavy load is 347–520 pounds. The machine can ﬂy or swim only when lightly loaded. The machine can lift a weight of up to 1,040 pounds to a height of 15 feet. It can push or drag 2,600 pounds. It can excavate 7,000 pounds of loose rock each minute (which is sufﬁcient to clear a 5-by-5-by-5-foot space in 3 rounds). It can excavate sand or loose soil at twice that rate. The machine has an attack bonus of +5 and can make one slam attack each round that deals 1d8+4 points of damage. It deals triple slam damage (3d8+12) against stone or metal. The machine can hurl Small rocks (if any are at hand) with an attack bonus of +3. Its range increment is 150 feet, and it can throw a rock up to 10 range increments. A thrown rock deals 2d6+4 points of damage.  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The gems vaporize in your hand as you intone the spell. The rising vapors surround your ally, granting him the blessing of your beliefs. The subject receives the protection of a divine power commensurate with the value of the expended material component. Only one of the beneﬁts described below applies per casting of this spell; they do not stack. By expending 250 gp, you grant the subject damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic 10; and spell resistance equal to your caster level. By expending 1,000 gp, you grant the subject damage reduction 10/magic; resistance to acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic 15; and spell resistance equal to your caster level +5. By expending 10,000 gp, you grant the subject damage reduction 20/magic; resistance to acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic 20; and spell resistance equal to your caster level +10. Material Component: Gems worth a total of 250 gp, 1,000 gp, or 10,000 gp.  89  FEARSOME GRAPPLE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Twoshort,otyughliketentaclessproutfrom under your arms to hang limply at your sides. When you think of grappling, the tentacles twitch to life and wave about as if seeking a foe. You grow two tentacles that grant you a +4 circumstance bonus on grapple checks. These tentacles cannot attack, hold objects, manipulate items, or perform any action other than grappling. If your caster level is at least 9th, you grow four tentacles instead, and the circumstance bonus increases to +8.  FELL THE GREATEST FOE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 2, cleric 3, paladin 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch the creature, and its muscles ripple with yellow energy. The subject gains the ability to deal greater damage against larger creatures. For every size category of an opponent bigger than the subject of the spell, the subject deals an extra 1d6 points of damage on any successful melee attack. For example, a Medium creature would deal an extra 1d6 points of damage against a Large creature, 2d6 against Huge, 3d6 against Gargantuan, or 4d6 against a Colossal creature. Material Component: A dragon’s claw or a giant’s ﬁngernail.  FIELD OF GHOULS Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Hunger 7  90  Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Wrenchinglifefromtheirbodieswithyour magic, your foes’ remains stir and rise as ghouls under your control. Humanoid creatures in the area with –1 to –9 hit points that fail their saving throws die and immediately rise as ghouls (MM 118) under your control. You choose whether the ghouls follow you, or whether they can remain where formed and attack any creature (or just a speciﬁc kind of creature) the ghouls notice. The ghouls remain until they are destroyed. The ghouls that you create remain under your control indeﬁnitely. No matter how many ghouls you generate with this spell, however, you can control only 4 HD worth of undead creatures per caster level (this includes undead from all sources under your control). If you exceed this number, all the newly created creatures fall under your control, and any excess undead from previous castings become uncontrolled (you choose which creatures are released). If you are a cleric, any undead you might command by virtue of your power to command or rebuke undead do not count toward the limit. Creatures that fall to –1 hit points or fewer in the area after the spell is cast are likewise subject to its effect and rise as ghouls on your next turn. No creature can be affected by this spell more than once per round, regardless of the number of times that the area of the spell passes over it. This spell does not affect creatures that are already dead, or creatures that are killed by reducing their hit points to –10.  FIELD OF ICY RAZORS  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 60 ft. apart  Duration: Instantaneous plus 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: Yes Yourbreathbecomescoldandfrostyasyou intone this spell, and blue-white crystals eruptfromthesoil,chillairswirlingaround their needle-sharp tips. Razor-sharp ice crystals surround the targets. Each target takes 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6); half of this damage is cold damage, and half is slashing. In addition, each target’s speed is reduced by 20 feet for 1 round per caster level. Creatures that succeed on Reﬂex saving throws take half damage and their movement is unaffected. Focus: A silver shuriken worth 50 gp that looks like a snowﬂake.  FIENDFORM  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level The bone in your hand cracks and then crumbles to dust as you complete the spell. You see within your subconscious a bestiaryofterribleﬁendsevenasdarkwhispers in your mind attempt to convince you which form to take. This spell functions like alter self (PH 197), except that you can take the form of any ﬁendish creature, demon, or devil that can be summoned by a summon monster I, II, III, or IV spell (MM 287), regardless of size. You can assume only one form with each use of the spell, but you gain all that form’s extraordinary, spell-like, and supernatural abilities, and your type changes to outsider. Spells and effects that harm or ward evil outsiders affect you, and any effect that would normally banish an outsider to its home plane instead ends the spell and leaves you dazed for 1 round per caster level. Material Component: A bone from any ﬁendish creature, half-ﬁend, demon, or devil.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  FIERCE PRIDE OF THE BEASTLANDS  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Good] Level: Cleric 8, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Green-white fog rises from the ground as you intone this spell, and great feline shadowstakesshapewithinthemistycloud.The ﬁrst of a pride of golden-pelted lions with silver eyes emerges from the fog. When the spell is complete, 2d4 celestial lions (MM 274) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 celestial dire lions (MM 63) appear. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell.  A celestial lion called by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite evil attack that provides a +5 bonus on one damage roll. A celestial dire lion called by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10; spell resistance 13; and a smite evil attack that provides a +8 bonus on one damage roll. The creatures obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the creatures. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  FIND THE GAP  Divination Level: Assassin 3, paladin 3, ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  You speak the words of this spell, and a blue mark that only you can see appears on youropponent,highlightingaweakspotin her defense.  Illus. by B. Hagan  A ﬁeld of icy razors stops a centaur’s charge  You gain the ability to perceive weak points in your opponent’s armor. Your ﬁrst melee or ranged attack each round is resolved as a touch attack, disregarding the subject’s armor, shield, and natural armor bonuses (including any enhancement bonuses) to Armor Class. Other AC bonuses, such as dodge bonuses, deﬂection bonuses, and luck bonuses, still apply.  FIND TEMPLE  Divination Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 miles + 1 mile/level Area: Circle centered on you, with a radius of 10 miles + 1 mile/level Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  91  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  At ease and ﬁlled with a reassuring calm, you close your eyes for a moment to allow your deity to guide you to a holy place. With this spell, you can easily ﬁnd a place to worship and possible aid or shelter from the priests within. When the spell is cast, you sense the direction of the nearest temple to your god. If there is none within the spell’s area, the spell instead shows you the direction of the nearest temple dedicated to a god of the same alignment as yours. You can also specify a particular temple to search for, but you must have visited the temple personally at some point in the past (seeing the temple through a divination does not count).  Illus. by P. Martin  FINS TO FEET  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) The naga’s lower extremities thrash about and slowly transform into humanoid limbs. This spell transforms tails, tentacles, or ﬁnned extremities into humanoid legs and feet. Creatures so affected lose any natural swim speed they possess, but gain a land speed instead. Transmuted Medium creatures have a base land speed of 30 feet, Small and smaller creatures have a base land speed of 20 feet, and Large or larger creatures have a base land speed of 40 feet. The subject loses any natural attacks based on its tail or tentacles.  two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Withafewfrenziedmotionsyoucomplete the spell, bathing your allies in halos of magical ﬂame. This spell functions like ﬁre shield (PH 230), except as noted above.  FIRE SHURIKEN  Evocation [Fire] Level: Assassin 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: One magic shuriken/3 levels Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes With dark intent you complete the quick motions of the spell and ﬁnd in your hand several shuriken composed of ﬂame. This spell creates shuriken formed of magical ﬁre that you can throw as a normal ranged attack. You are automatically considered proﬁcient with the ﬁre shuriken, which have a range increment of 10 feet, threaten a critical hit on a roll of 19–20, and deal 3d6 points of ﬁre damage each on a successful hit (although you and your possessions take no damage as the shuriken are thrown). Any additional damage  dealt by the ﬁre shuriken (including your Strength bonus and sneak attack damage) is also ﬁre damage. The shuriken disappear when they hit, so they cannot set ﬁre to combustibles or damage objects. You can create one ﬁre shuriken per three caster levels, up to a maximum of six at 18th level. Material Component: A shuriken coated with pine sap and sulfur.  FIRE SPIDERS  Conjuration (Summoning) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Fiery spiders that cover a 10-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Tiny lights appear in the darkness—one, ten, over a hundred. As they appear, the soundofinsectilechitteringincreases,until aswarmingarmyofﬂaming,otherworldly arachnids is gathered together at your command. You call forth a teeming mass of ﬁre elementals the size of common spiders. A creature that starts its turn in the affected area takes 4d6 points of ﬁre damage. Each round, you can use a move action to direct the spiders to move up to 30 feet. If the spiders are left undirected, they move at a speed of 15 feet toward the nearest living  FIRE SHIELD, MASS  92  Evocation [Fire or Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One or more allied creatures, no Fire spiders are nearly impossible to defeat by attacking individual ones  creature, if one isn’t already in the affected area. As ﬁre elementals, the ﬁre spiders have immunity to ﬁre and are thwarted by barriers that block neutral outsiders. Any cold spell of 3rd level or higher can disperse the ﬁre spiders, ending the spell. Material Component: A pinch of sulfur.  You draw arcane power into your body, wrapping your feet and legs with wisps of ﬂame. You gain the ability to step into ﬁres and move from one ﬁre to another. The ﬁres you enter and move between must be at least as big around as you are. Fire elementals and other ﬁre creatures are not considered “ﬁres” for the purpose of this spell, nor are sources of great heat, such as pools of lava. Once in a ﬁre, you instantly know the locations of all suitable ﬁres within long range (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) and can transport yourself to one of them. Each transport counts as a full-round action. With each casting of the spell, you can transport yourself once per caster level. If a ﬁre’s location doesn’t offer enough space for you (for example, a ﬁre contained inside a furnace too small to hold you or a ﬁre already occupied by a big cauldron), it is not a viable destination and you don’t sense its location. If a ﬁre rests on a surface that can’t support you, it is still a viable destination and you suffer the appropriate consequences if you transport yourself to it. For example, if you transport yourself into a ﬁre burning in a pit full of oil, you fall into the oil when you arrive there. Fire stride provides no protection against ﬁre, so it is advisable to obtain such protection before using the spell.  In a ﬂash of light and a roar of ﬁre, your arms become wings of ﬂame. This spell transforms your arms into wings of brilliant ﬁre. The ﬂame does not damage you or any items you carry. Because your arms are transformed, you cannot hold items in your hands or cast spells that require somatic components, but rings, bracers, and other items worn on your arms when you cast the spell still function normally. The wings allow you to ﬂy at a speed of 60 feet (or 40 feet if you wear medium or heavy armor), with good maneuverability. You can charge but not run while ﬂying, and you cannot carry more than a light load aloft. Using a ﬁre wings spell requires only as much concentration as walking, so you can take other actions normally. If the spell duration expires while you are aloft, you descend at a rate of 60 feet per round for 1d6 rounds, then fall the rest of the distance if you haven’t already landed. Because dispelling a spell effectively ends it, the subject also descends in this way if the ﬁre wings spell is dispelled, but not if it is negated by an antimagic ﬁeld. If you are not ﬂying, you can make up to two attacks each round with the ﬁre wings as if they were natural weapons. A successful attack deals 2d6 points of ﬁre damage. The wings can be extinguished (and the spell canceled) by a quench spell, immersion in water, or a wind of hurricane or greater force. Material Component: The feather of a bird, which you must burn when you cast the spell. Focus: A golden amulet shaped like a phoenix (worth 150 gp).  FIREBRAND  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M  The ﬂask of alchemist’s ﬁre vanishes from your hand and the ground erupts beneath your foes, shooting multiple fountains of ﬁery liquid upward. Each burst deals 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to all creatures within the area. All subjects hit by the burst in the round the spell is cast or within the area in the following round take 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). A character struck in the round the spell is cast can attempt to extinguish the ﬂames on itself as a full-round action with a successful DC 15 Reﬂex save. Burst effects that overlap do not deal additional damage (a creature can be affected by only one burst). Material Component: A ﬂask of alchemist’s ﬁre (worth 20 gp).  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level or until expended; see text  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: One 5-ft.-radius burst/level (S) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  FIRE STRIDE  FIRE WINGS  FIREBURST  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Effect: Burst of ﬁre extending 10 ft. from you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes With a grand circular gesture the air around you ﬁlls with ﬂame. An instant later the ﬁre explodes outward, engulﬁng everything close to you. Fireburst causes a powerful explosion of ﬂame to burst from you, damaging anyone within 10 feet of you. All creatures and objects within that area, except for you and any creatures or objects that share your space, take 1d8 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 5d8). Material Component: A bit of sulfur.  93  FIREBURST, GREATER  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Effect: Burst of ﬁre extending 15 ft. from you This spell functions like ﬁreburst, except that it affects creatures within 15 feet of you and deals 1d10 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 15d10).  Youstompontheground,andﬁresnuffsout all around you, rippling away to nothingness faster than you can blink. This spell functions like quench (PH 267), except as noted above. In addition, it has the following effects.  FIRES OF PURITY  Evocation [Fire] Level: Druid 6, Puriﬁcation 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless); see text You touch the target, and it bursts into ﬂames that do not harm it, although the heat you feel from the ﬁre seems quite real to you. The creature you touch bursts into magical ﬂames that do not harm the subject, but are capable of harming anyone else who comes into contact with the creature. With a successful melee attack, the subject deals an extra 1 point of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum +15). If the defender has spell resistance, it applies to this effect. Creatures that make successful melee attacks against the subject are susceptible to the same damage unless they attack with weapons that have reach, such as longspears. The subject of ﬁres of purity takes only half damage from ﬁre-based attacks. If such an attack allows a Reﬂex save for half damage, the subject takes no damage on a successful save.  FIREWARD  94  Area: One 20-ft. cube/level (S) Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)  A sorcerer keeps a ﬂame dagger at the ready while she casts another spell  While ﬁreward remains in effect, no magical ﬁre effect can function inside its area. This effect is similar to that of an antimagic ﬁeld, but only magical ﬁre is suppressed. Any nonmagical ﬁre created inside or brought into the spell’s area is immediately extinguished as well.  FIST OF STONE  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute  The complicated gestures of the spell end with a punch of your ﬁst, which now has the texture and look of stone. You transform one of your hands into a mighty ﬁst of living stone, gaining a +6 enhancement bonus to Strength for the purposes of attack rolls, grapple checks, or breaking and crushing items. In addition, you gain the ability to make one natural slam attack, dealing 1d6 points of damage + your new Strength bonus (or 1-1/2 times your Strength bonus if you make no other attacks in that round). You can make the slam attack as a natural secondary attack with the normal –5 penalty, or a –2 penalty if you have the Multiattack feat (MM 304), as part of a full attack action. However, you cannot gain more than one slam attack per round with this spell due to a high base attack bonus (+6 or higher). Your ﬁst undergoes no change in size or form, remaining as ﬂexible and responsive as it would normally be while under the spell’s effect. Material Component: A pebble inscribed with a stylized ﬁst design.  FLAME DAGGER  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A daggerlike beam Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You evoke the spell and a blazing beam of red-hot ﬁre springs forth from your hand, ready to be used as a weapon. You create a bladelike beam that you can wield as if it were a dagger. Attacks with a ﬂame dagger are melee touch attacks, and the blade deals 1d4 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level (to a maximum of +10). Because the blade is immaterial, your Strength  modiﬁer does not apply to the damage. A ﬂame dagger can ignite combustible materials such as parchment, straw, dry sticks, cloth, and so on. This spell does not function underwater. Material Component: A candle.  FLAME OF FAITH  You can temporarily turn any single normal or masterwork melee weapon into a magic, ﬂaming one. For the duration of the spell, the weapon acts as a +1 ﬂaming burst weapon. Material Component: A lump of phosphorus, touched to the target weapon.  FLAME WHIPS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Effect: Flaming whips Duration: 1 round/level (D) At the conclusion of this spell, your arms stretchintowhiplikeappendagesandburst into ﬂames. Your forelimbs transform into ﬂaming whips. You gain two melee touch attacks with a 15-foot reach that each deal 6d6 points of ﬁre damage. Attacks with these ﬂaming whips replace any natural attacks you had with those limbs. While this spell is in effect, you cannot cast spells with material components, nor can you carry items with your forelimbs. Any items worn on your forelimbs cease functioning while the spell is active.  Ablindingﬂashoflightfollowsthecasting of this spell. Flashburst creates a blinding, dazzling ﬂash of light. Sighted creatures within the area are blinded for 2d8 rounds. A successful Will save negates the blindness. Creatures in the area are dazzled for 1 round even if their save was successful. Creatures outside the area, but within 120 feet of the burst, can be blinded for 2d8 rounds if they have line of sight to the burst (Will negates). Creatures outside the burst area are not dazzled. Arcane Material Component: A pinch of sulfur or phosphorus.  FLENSING  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One corporeal creature Duration: 4 rounds Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a cruel utterance, you complete the spell and unleash its terrible energy. A sickeninglywetrippingsoundaccompanies the sight of strips of ﬂesh being torn away, as if some invisible hand was attempting to peel your target like an onion. When you cast this spell, you literally strip the ﬂesh from a corporeal creature’s body, inﬂicting incredible pain and psychological trauma. Each round, the subject takes 2d6 points of damage, 1d6 points of Charisma damage, and 1d6 points of Constitution damage. A successful Fortitude save negates the ability damage and reduces the hit point damage by half for that round, but does not end the spell.  FLESHSHIVER  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Breaking the bone in the grip of your ﬁst, youhearthesickeningbutsatisfyingcrunch of your foe’s bones breaking beneath his squeezing ﬂesh.  CHAPTER 1  Using your faith as a guide for your magic, you touch the weapon and it bursts into ﬂame.  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Flensing has no effect on creatures in gaseous form. Material Component: An onion.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Nonmagical weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  FLASHBURST  A creature with Hit Dice less than or equal to your caster level is automatically stunned for 1 round (no saving throw). A creature with Hit Dice greater than your caster level is allowed a saving throw to negate the stunning effect. In the following round, the target must make a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) and be nauseated by the pain for 1d4+2 rounds. Material Component: A bone, which is snapped during the casting of the spell.  FLIGHT OF THE DRAGON  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) The wing-claw vaporizes in a puff of acrid smoke, and you feel the muscles of your shoulderswarmfromtheeldritchenergies coursing within. Great draconian wings unfurl from your shoulders and reach toward the sky. A powerful pair of wings sprout from your shoulders, granting you a ﬂy speed of 100 feet (average). You can’t carry aloft more than a light load.  95  Illus. by R. Horsley  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  When ﬂying long distances, you can ﬂy at 15 miles per hour (or 24 miles per hour at a hustle). Material Component: A dragon’s wing claw. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  FLOATING DISK, GREATER  You squawk twice like an eagleandsuddenlylongfor the freedom of the skies.  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: 3-ft.-diameter disk of force Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  This spell functions like ﬂy (PH 232), except as noted above.  FOCUSING CHANT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute (D)  Letting the mercury drip to the groundyoucreateaslightlyconcave disk of energy. It hovers several feet above the ground. This spell functions like Tenser’s ﬂoating disk (PH 294), except that the created disk does not need to stay within 3 feet of the surface beneath it. However, the disk must remain within 15 feet of you at all times. You can concentrate (as a standard action) on the disk to make it move with a ﬂy speed of 20 feet (perfect). This allows you to sit on the disk and command it to carry you about. Material Component: A drop of mercury.  FLY, MASS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  96  FLY, SWIFT  Asyourgesturespointoutwhichcreatures receivethebeneﬁtsofyourspell,theyseem lighter on their feet.  You chant softly under your breath and concentrate on the sound of your voice. Distractions fade from your consciousness,allowingyoutofocuson the task at hand. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus on attack rolls, skill checks, and ability checks for the duration of the spell. Mass ﬂy allows a whole squad of drow to gain control of the battleﬁeld  This spell functions like ﬂy (PH 232), except as noted here. This spell confers the power of ﬂight upon all targeted creatures. Each recipient of the spell must remain within 30 feet of at least one other recipient, or the spell ends for the creature that is separated from the others. If only two individuals are affected, the spell ends for both if the distance between them exceeds 30 feet.  FOEBANE  Evocation Level: Ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) Holding aloft the weapon, you name the kind of creature you wish to slay. With a ﬂash, the weapon takes on a blue glow that  quickly fades to a barely perceptible aura surrounding it.  Material Component: A 2-inch-square glass cube.  FORCE CLAW  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Invisible claw of force Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  A force chest spell gives a lich a sense of security when confronted by troublesome adventurers  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One ladder of force up to 60 ft. long Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by R. Spears  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Box of force 2 ft. on a side Duration: 24 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  This spell brings into being a lidded box of force. The box appears in your hands, and you can choose to make it either invisible or merely translucent. The chest has no weight worth noting. Solid walls of force form the chest’s ﬁve sides and lid. You and other creatures cannot open the lid except by ﬁrst speaking the password (determined by you at the time of casting). Both objects and Tiny and smaller creatures can ﬁt in the box; it holds enough air to supply  Force claw creates a Medium claw of invisible force at any spot you designate within the spell’s range. The claw guards the area of a 20-foot cube that you specify. You can move the claw’s location up to 60 feet to another point within range each round on your turn as a move action. The claw is able to make attacks of opportunity against any enemy that provokes such attacks within the guarded area. It has a +10 bonus on the attack roll and deals 1d8+6 points of damage with a successful hit. It can make an unlimited number of attacks of opportunity each round, though it can make only one such attack per opportunity. Material Component: A small, dried claw from an animal.  FORCE LADDER  FORCE CHEST  Holding your hands as if to grip a box, you feel the pressure ofoneappearasyoucompletethespell.The passwordyouchoosetounlocktheboxechoes through your mind.  Curling your hand into a claw, you ﬁnish the ﬁnal gesture. Your foes see no result from your spell, but you know they’re in for a surprise.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  When you cast this spell, choose one of your favored enemies. Against creatures of the selected enemy kind, the weapon acts as a +5 magic weapon and deals an extra 2d6 points of damage. Furthermore, while you wield the weapon, you gain a +4 resistance bonus on saving throws against effects created by creatures of that kind. The spell is automatically canceled 1 round after the weapon leaves your hand for any reason. You cannot have more than one foebane weapon active at a time. If this spell is cast on a magic weapon, the powers of the spell supersede any that the weapon normally has, rendering the normal enhancement bonus and powers of the weapon inoperative for the duration of the spell. This spell is not cumulative with any other spell that might modify the weapon in any way. This spell does not work on artifacts.  one Tiny, two Diminutive, or four Fine creatures for 1 hour. Like a wall of force spell, a force chest is immune to damage of all kinds and resists dispel magic, but it is susceptible to disintegrate and Mordenkainen’s disjunction, and it can be destroyed by a sphere of annihilation or a rod of cancellation. The box is a spell effect, and Open Lock and Use Magic Device cannot open it.  You concentrate on the small silver model of the ladder in your outstretched hand. A transparent ladder, visible only by its edges, appears. You create an immobile transparent ladder made of force. The ladder is 2 feet wide and anywhere from 10 to 60 feet long, with rungs spaced 1 foot apart. The ladder functions as a normal ladder and can support any weight. It can be destroyed by anything that destroys a wall of force. Focus: A miniature silver ladder (50 gp).  97  Illus. by S. Belledin  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  FORCE MISSILES  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Up to four creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Sparking bolts of blue magic, like giant magic missiles, streak from your outstretched hand to strike your foes and explode in sparkling bursts. You create powerful missiles of magical force, each of which darts from your ﬁngertips and unerringly strikes its target, dealing 2d6 points of damage. The missile then explodes in a burst of force that deals half this amount of damage to any creatures adjacent to the primary target. The missile strikes unerringly, even if the target is in melee or has anything less than total cover or concealment. A caster cannot single out speciﬁc parts of a creature. The spell can target and damage unattended objects. You gain one missile for every four caster levels. You can make more than one missile strike a single target, if desired. However, you must designate targets before rolling for spell resistance or damage.  Waiving your arm about your head to trace the curve of a dome, you call up a hemisphere of force as clear as glass. You create an unmoving, transparent sphere of force centered on you. The sphere negates force effects and provides an impassable barrier against incorporeal creatures. Spells with the force descriptor do not affect anything within the sphere, and any force spell that overlaps the area, such as wall of force, is automatically countered. Incorporeal creatures, or creatures with the force descriptor must make a Will save to enter the area of the sphere. Forceward does not push a creature out of the way if you move toward an incorporeal creature or force effect, and such creatures are treated as if they automatically succeeded on their saving throws against this spell.  FORCEWAVE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 10 ft. Effect: 10-ft. burst of force centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  FORCEWARD  Abjuration [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: 15 ft. Effect: 15-ft.-radius sphere centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  98  You catch the drop of water on the string and snap it at your target. The waterdrop swells and becomes a blue-green wave of magical force, tumbling toward your opponents. This spell initiates a bull rush against all creatures within 10 feet. The forcewave has a +10 bonus on the bull rush attempt. All creatures are pushed to the extent of the bull rush result, and the result of the bull rush can push creatures beyond the spell’s normal range. Focus: A small piece of string and a drop of water.  FORESTFOLD  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Warmth ﬁlls your feet, and as you glance down, you see that your feet have changed shape slightly, enabling you to better traverse a particular type of terrain. You also notice a shift in the color of your skin and clothingtomatchthecolorsmostcommonly found in your environment. You change your coloring and attune your footfalls to one speciﬁc kind of terrain (aquatic, desert, plains, forest, hills, mountains, marsh, or underground). While you are in terrain of that kind, you gain a +10 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. You retain these bonuses even if you leave the designated terrain and return within the duration of the spell.  FORTIFY FAMILIAR  Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Familiar touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  A druid uses the freeze spell to encase a despoiler of nature in ice  You touch your familiar, and you see that the creature seems more robust.  This spell makes your familiar tougher, granting it 2d8 temporary hit points and a +2 enhancement bonus to its natural armor. It also has a 25% chance to avoid extra damage from sneak attacks or critical hits (although such attacks still deal normal damage if successful). Temporary hit points gained in this fashion last for up to 1 hour.  Agoldenauraspreadsoutfromyourﬁngertips,suffusingyourallywithagoldenglow that brightens, then fades into her skin. You surround the subject with an aura that immediately heals the creature if it is subjected to an effect that would kill it (reduce its hit points to –10 or below). When this event occurs, the fortunate fate spell intervenes by immediately triggering a heal spell upon the target. If the effect is one that causes harm in a way that a heal spell can repair (disease, hit point damage, ability damage, or poison), the target does not actually die, saved by the heal. If the effect is one that heal cannot countermand (such as ability drain, old age, negative levels, disintegration, ability drain, or death effects), the fortunate fate spell cannot prevent the creature’s death.  As long as they do not move and remain standing on solid ground, the subject creatures gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class and a +4 bonus on Strength checks made to resist being bull rushed or tripped. If this spell is cast in mountainous terrain, the bonus on Strength checks granted by this spell increases to +6.  FREEZE  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/2 levels Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  FREEZING FOG  FOUNDATION OF STONE  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Calling upon the strength of the earth, you lend some of the stability of stone to your allies.  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A target struck takes 2d6 points of cold damage. A creature struck must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be encased in a 5-inch-thick sheath of ice and be immobilized (and thus helpless). A creature encased in ice takes 2d6 points of cold damage each round until freed. A target encased in ice is aware and breathes normally but cannot speak or move other than to attempt to escape by making a Strength check (see below). It can still execute purely mental actions, such as using a spell-like ability. A spellcaster can cast a spell with no verbal or somatic component as long as the spell lacks a focus or material component, or the material component, focus, or divine focus is already in the spellcaster’s hand. The ice blocks line of effect. A winged creature cannot ﬂap its wings and falls. A swimmer can’t swim but, because ice ﬂoats, the encased swimmer will rise to the surface and bob about. A DC 22 Strength check breaks the ice, freeing the encased creature. Creatures other than the target can also attack the ice. The ice has hardness 0 and 15 hit points. When the duration of the spell expires, the ice melts and the encased creature is freed. Damage that would harm the creature must ﬁrst deal enough damage to destroy the ice before the creature takes damage, and damage dealt to the ice is subtracted from damage that would be dealt to the creature.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  FORTUNATE FATE  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Callingupondivinepower,yourhandturns cold and numb as you complete the spell. A moment later, a thin blue ray swirled with white streaks from your outstretched hand, leaving a light fog in the air where it passed.  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Fog spreads in a 20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  99  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Acoolmistrisesfromtheareayouindicate. The thick mist blocks your ability to see within it, but the ground at its edge has turned white with frost. A bank of freezing mist billows out from the point you designate, obscuring all sight (including darkvision) beyond 5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has concealment, while creatures farther away have total concealment. Each round on your turn, the frigid mist deals 1d6 points of cold damage to each creature and object within it. The fog is so thick that any creature attempting to move through it progresses at a maximum speed of 5 feet (regardless of its normal speed) and takes a –2 penalty on melee attack rolls and damage rolls and a –6 penalty on ranged weapon attack rolls (but not ranged spell attack rolls). A creature or object that falls into the fog from above is slowed, so that each 10 feet of mist it passes through effectively reduces overall falling damage by 1d6. Freezing fog also coats all solid surfaces in its area with a slick, icy rime, and on your turn each round, each creature in the area of the fog must make a successful Reﬂex save or fall prone. A creature that manages to stand must make a DC 10 Balance check in order to move, falling prone if it fails its save by 5 or more. Creatures in the fog can’t take a 5-foot step. A severe wind disperses the cloud in 1 round. The spell does not function underwater.  FROST BREATH  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 2, druid 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Givingaforcefulexhaleacrossyourcupped hand, your breath shoots forth tinged with frost and crystals of ice.  100  You breathe a cone of intense cold at your foes. The spell deals 1d4 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d4). In addition, all creatures  damaged by the frost breath that fail their Reﬂex save are dazed for 1 round by the sudden shock of cold. Material Component: Three drops of water or fragments of ice (which are held in a cupped palm and blown toward the target).  FUGUE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius spread Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Upon completing the spell, a discordant cacophony of haunting and alien music risesupintheareayoudesignate.Although thestrangemusicreachesyourears,youfeel no effect from it. Creatures that fail their save become affected by the haunting fugue in semirandom ways. On each affected creature’s turn (as long as it remains in the affected area), you make a Perform check. The check result determines how the victim’s mind and body are affected by the spell. You can select any of the effects for which your Perform check equals or exceeds the required DC. DC Result 15 Victim takes 3d6 points of nonlethal damage 20 Victim takes 3d6 points of sonic damage 25 Victim is knocked prone 30 Victim is nauseated for 1 round 35 Victim is stunned for 1 round 40 Victim attacks nearest target  All creatures that succeed on their saves against the spell are disoriented and take a –2 penalty on attack rolls and skill checks as long as they remain in the affected area. Focus: A miniature violin bow made of platinum worth 250 gp.  FUSE ARMS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature with at least two arms or tentacles touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Convulsing, the touched subject’s limbs begintooozetogetherwithasickeningnoise like a pot of melted wax splattering on the ﬂoor. With a lurch they form into one pair of massive limbs. You cause a creature’s multiple arms or tentacles to fuse together into a single pair of stronger limbs. Only limbs that the creature can use as arms or grasping limbs are affected by the spell (so basilisks and monstrous centipedes, neither of which use their limbs to attack or manipulate objects, are unaffected). For every set of limbs fused into the primary set of limbs, the creature gains +4 to Strength when using those fused limbs (affecting activities that would use those limbs, but not activities relying on its bite, legs, and so on). For example, a girallon under the effect of this spell would have one pair of arms and Strength 26 for the purpose of using those arms. A behir, which has three pairs of limbs that it can use as arms, would end up with one pair of arm-limbs with a +8 bonus to Strength for those arms (its six legs would be unaffected). The loss of limbs might reduce the number of attacks available to the subject. If the subject has only two arms or tentacles, they are fused into a single limb, and the creature gains a +4 bonus to Strength on attack rolls made with that limb.  G’ELSEWHERE CHANT Conjuration [Sonic, Teleportation] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One creature or object touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  solid object, or more than 5 feet above the ground. If your target is being held (whether an object held by a character or a character being grappled by a creature), the holding or grappling creature also receives a Will saving throw to resist.  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Force] Level: Gnome 2, Trade 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: Gem touched Du ration: 10 minutes/ level or until used Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  GEMBOMB  You place a small spark of energy in the heart of a valuable gem. Illus. by E. Polak  You turn a gem into a bomb that you (and only you) can lob at enemies. You must hold the gem in your hand when casting the spell. You can toss the bomb with perfect accuracy anywhere within 60 feet. The gembomb explodes in a 5-footradius burst dealing 1d8 points of force damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8). Tossing a gembomb is a standard action. Material Component: A gem worth at least 1 gp.  GEMJUMP  A marilith makes good use of the fuse arms spell  You touch the target and it vanishes in a showerofgoldensparks.Almostinstantly, it appears a short distance away. You teleport a target to a random, safe location up to 100 feet distant and visible to you.  To randomly determine the subject’s destination, roll 1d8 to determine the direction, then roll 1d10×10 to determine the distance from the subject’s previous location. Roll direction and distance again if this new destination is outside your line of sight, within a  Conjuration [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 round Range: Unlimited; see text Target: You and willing creatures totaling up to one/3 levels; see text Duration: Until triggered Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No; see text You mutter over the iridescent, faceted gem. It twinkles in response, and you feel a strong link between you and the stone. When you speak the word, the two of you will be reunited.  101  Illus. by R. Horsley  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  102  The general of undeath spell makes an evil cleric into a true leader of those beyond fear and death  This spell teleports you to the location of a specially prepared gem. You initially cast gemjump upon the focus, which you must touch. As a standard action any time after you prepare the stone, you can utter a command word and instantly teleport to the location of the gem, provided you and the stone are on the same plane. The teleport is always on target (as though you are using a greater teleport spell). If the area containing the gem is too small for you, you appear in the nearest sufﬁciently large space. You can transport, in addition to yourself, one Medium or smaller creature per three caster levels, and can bring along objects as long as their weight does not exceed your maximum load. An unwilling creature can’t be teleported by gemjump. Likewise, a creature’s Will save (or spell resistance) prevents items in its possession from being teleported. Unattended, nonmagical objects receive no saving throw. Focus: A gem worth 500 gp.  GENERAL OF UNDEATH Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 24 hours  Youfocusonthedarknesswithinyoursoul, willing it to grow and grant you the power to control a greater number of undead minions. This spell increases the number of Hit Dice of undead that you can control by an amount equal to your caster level. When the duration expires, you lose control of the extra undead as if you had voluntarily relinquished control of them.  GHOST TOUCH ARMOR Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch  Target: Armor of creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Confrontedwithincorporealenemies,you give the armor you touch the power to defend against such foes. The subject’s armor gains the ghost touch special ability (DMG 219). Material Component: A tiny shield made of resin.  GHOST TOUCH WEAPON  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One weapon or ﬁfty projectiles (all of which must be in contact with each other at the time of casting) Duration: 1 minute/level  Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) With a few words and a gesture, you empower a weapon to strike true against incorporeal foes.  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 5 ft./level Area: 5 ft./level-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Energy ripples outward from you, rendering solid the insubstantial. You are surrounded by a ﬁeld of energy that negates incorporeality. The radius of the ﬁeld is 5 feet per caster level. All incorporeal creatures in this ﬁeld become corporeal. Creatures cannot turn ethereal while in this area, and ethereal creatures cannot enter or affect the plane this spell was cast on while in this ﬁeld.  GHOSTFORM  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action  You assume a visible, incorporeal form like that of a manifesting ghost. You gain the incorporeal subtype for the duration of the spell, providing you with the following abilities and characteristics. You have no physical body while in this state. You can be harmed only by other incorporeal creatures, magic weapons or creatures that strike as magic weapons, and spells, spell-like abilities, or supernatural abilities. You are immune to all nonmagical attack forms. Even when hit by spells, including touch spells, or magic weapons, you have a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal source (except for positive energy, negative energy, force effects, or attacks made with ghost touch weapons). Nondamaging spell effects affect you normally unless they require corporeal targets to function (such as implosion) or they create a corporeal effect that incorporeal creatures would normally be unaffected by (such as a web or wall of stone spell). Your attacks while in ghostform pass through (ignore) natural armor, armor, and shields, although deﬂection bonuses and force effects (such as mage armor) work normally against you. Nonmagical attacks you make with a melee weapon have no effect on corporeal targets, and any melee attack you make with a magic weapon against a corporeal target has a 50% miss chance, except for attacks you make with a ghost touch weapon, which are made normally (no miss chance). Spells you cast while in ghostform affect corporeal targets normally, including spells that require you to make an attack roll (such as rays or melee touch spells). Any equipment you are wearing or carrying is also incorporeal as long as it remains in your possession. An object that you relinquish loses its incorporeal quality (and you lose the ability to manipulate the object). If you use a thrown weapon or a ranged  CHAPTER 1  GHOST TRAP  Laughing at death, you assume a ghostly form in which you can pass through walls.  weapon, the projectile becomes corporeal as soon as it is ﬁred and can affect a corporeal target normally (no miss chance). Magic items you possess work normally with respect to their effects on you or on another target. As an incorporeal creature, you have no natural armor bonus but have a deﬂection bonus equal to your Charisma bonus (always at least +1, even if your Charisma score does not normally provide a bonus). You can enter or pass through solid objects while in ghostform, but you must remain adjacent to the object’s exterior, and so you cannot pass entirely through an object whose space is larger than your own. You can sense the presence of creatures or objects within a square adjacent to your current location, but enemies have total concealment from you while you are inside an object. In order to see farther from the object you are in and attack normally, you must emerge. While inside an object, you have total cover, but when you attack a creature outside the object you have cover only, so a creature outside with a readied action could strike at you as you attack. You cannot pass through a force effect. You can pass through and operate in water as easily as you do in air. You cannot fall or take falling damage. You cannot make trip or grapple attacks, nor can you be tripped or grappled. In fact, you cannot take any physical action that would move or manipulate an opponent or its equipment, nor are you subject to such actions. You have no weight while in ghostform and do not set off traps that are triggered by weight. You move silently and cannot be heard with Listen checks if you don’t wish to be while in ghostform. You have no Strength score while incorporeal, so your Dexterity modiﬁer applies to both your melee attacks and ranged attacks. Nonvisual senses, such as scent and blindsight, are either ineffective or only partly effective with regard to you. You have an innate sense of direction and can move at full speed even when you cannot see.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Ghost touch weapon makes a weapon magically capable of dealing damage normally to incorporeal creatures, regardless of its enhancement bonus. (An incorporeal creature’s 50% chance to avoid damage does not apply to attacks made with weapons under the effect of this spell.) A ranged weapon affected by this spell does not bestow the ability on its ammunition. The weapon can be picked up and moved by an incorporeal creature at any time. A manifesting ghost can wield the weapon against corporeal foes. Essentially, a weapon under the effect of this spell counts as either corporeal or incorporeal at any given time, whichever is more beneﬁcial to the wielder.  Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  103  Illus. by C. Dien  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Already shaken by the appearance of the ghostly bard, the azers ﬂee upon hearing the spirit’s haunting tune  GHOSTHARP  Divination Level: Bard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Object touched Duration: 5 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You place the coin on the table, touch it, and whisper the words of the spell. Softly the coin begins to replay the music of the previous night’s performance.  104  You prepare an object that records and replays a song previously played or sung in its vicinity. When cast, the spell searches a radius of 50 feet for the lingering notes of a tune played there within the last day. It records these notes and reverberations. At your verbal command, “Play,” the ghostharp replays the music. The tune repeats until you command it to stop, or until its duration comes to an end. The ghostharp does not record conversations. Its imperfect replay can’t reproduce bardic music or  other magical effects, nor can it cast spells.  GHOUL GAUNTLET  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Hunger 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One living humanoid creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your touch gradually transforms a living victim into a ravening, ﬂesh-eating ghoul.  The subject takes 3d6 points of damage per round while its body slowly dies and its ﬂesh is transformed into the cold, undying ﬂesh of the undead. When the victim reaches 0 hit points, it becomes a ghoul (MM 118). If the target fails its initial saving throw, remove disease, dispel magic, heal, limited wish, miracle, Mordenkainen’s disjunction,removecurse,wish,orgreater  restoration negates the gradual change. Healing spells can temporarily prolong the process by increasing the victim’s hit points, but the transformation continues unabated. The ghoul that you create remains under your control indeﬁnitely. No matter how many ghouls you generate with this spell, however, you can control only 4 HD worth of undead creatures per caster level (this includes undead from all sources under your control). If you exceed this number, all the newly created creatures fall under your control, and any excess undead from previous castings become uncontrolled (you choose which creatures are released). If you are a cleric, any undead you might command by virtue of your power to command or rebuke undead do not count toward the limit.  GHOUL GESTURE  Necromancy Level: Hunger 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray  Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Agreenraystabsfromyourpointingﬁnger to strike the belly of your enemy.  Necromancy Level: Hunger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Magical, heatless ﬂame Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Necromancy Level: Hunger 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Object touched Duration: Permanent until discharged Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by W. England  The effect looks like a regular ﬂame, equivalent in brightness to a torch, except for its green hue, but it creates no heat and doesn’t use oxygen. Ghoul light can be covered and hidden, but not smothered or quenched. All undead within 30 feet of a source of ghoul light gain +1 turn resistance. Multiple ghoul light sources do not stack. Darkness spells of 2nd level or higher can counter ghoul light. Material Component: A bit of rendered fat.  CHAPTER 1  A sickly green ﬂame springs forth from an object that you touch.  GHOUL GLYPH  GIANT’S WRATH  The faint, green glow of the glyph ﬂares to life. A sickly green light ﬁlls the room, illuminating the paralyzed forms of its victims, and bringing with it the stench of death. You inscribe a glyph, approximately 1 foot across, that paralyzes any living creature of Large or smaller size that comes within 5 feet of the glyph. You can scribe the glyph to be visible as faintly glowing lines, or invisible. You can inscribe a ghoul glyph on a portable object, but if the object is moved more than 5 feet, the glyph fades. Conditions for triggering a ghoul glyph are stringent. It takes effect on any creature except yourself that moves within 5 feet. It affects invisible creatures normally but is not triggered by those that travel past it ethereally. Only a single ghoul glyph can be inscribed in a 5-foot square. Ghoul glyphs cannot be affected or bypassed by such means as physical or  GHOUL LIGHT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A subject that is successfully targeted must make a Fortitude save or be paralyzed for the duration of the spell. A subject of the ray that succeeds on its Fortitude save is instead sickened for the duration of the spell. Neutralize poison removes the sickened condition. Material Component: A small scrap of cloth taken from clothing worn by a ghoul, or a pinch of earth from a ghoul’s lair.  magical probing, though they can be dispelled. Mislead and nondetection can fool a ghoul glyph. Read magic allows identiﬁcation of a ghoul glyph with a successful DC 13 Spellcraft check, if the glyph is noticed before it is activated. A rogue can use the Search skill to ﬁnd a ghoul glyph and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 27.  Girallon’s blessing gives Krusk a hand in dealing with foes  When a glyph is activated, the target is paralyzed for 1d6+2 rounds. Additionally, if the target fails a Fortitude save, the paralyzed subject exudes a carrion stench that causes distress in all creatures within a 10-foot radius. Those in the radius, including the target, must make a Fortitude save or take a –2 penalty on attack rolls, weapon damage rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks until the paralysis effect wears off. Material Component: You trace the glyph with earth from a ghoul’s lair.  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Targets: One pebble/ 3 levels Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: None Withyourbestgiant’sshoutyourattlesome pebbles in your closed hand, completing the spell that will allow them to become boulders. You infuse a handful of stone pebbles with powerful transmutation magic. For the duration of the spell, you can hurl one pebble as an attack action that provokes attacks of opportunity. The instant the pebble leaves contact with your hand, its size and the force of your throw increase dramatically, as  105  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  the pebble transforms into a boulder. The boulder has a range increment of 120 feet, and you must succeed on a ranged attack to strike a target with the boulder. If you hit the target, the boulder deals 2d6 points of bludgeoning damage + your Str modiﬁer. You gain an insight bonus equal to your caster level on attack rolls and damage rolls (maximum +10) with these boulders. If you drop a pebble or give it to another creature, the pebbles’ magic dissipates harmlessly. Material Component: The pebbles to be transmuted.  GIRALLON’S BLESSING Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Thetouchedsubjectappearstobeindiscomfort for an instant before arms erupt from its torso with a damp squelch. You give the subject an additional pair of arms. Each of its arms—new and old—ends in a clawed hand with ﬁngers and an opposable thumb. The creature’s original arms (if any) are its primary arms, and new limbs are secondary limbs (if the subject had no arms, the arms created by the spell are its primary arms). The creature gains four claw attacks, each using its base attack bonus + its Str modiﬁer for attack rolls. Each claw deals 1d4 points of damage + the subject’s Str modiﬁer, and if an opponent is struck by two or more claws in 1 round, the subject can rend it for an additional 2d4 points of damage + 1-1/2 times its Str modiﬁer. A creature cannot use normal weapons and the claw attacks in the same round, and the subject does not gain additional claw attacks from a high base attack bonus. Material Component: A few strands of girallon hair.  106  GLASS STRIKE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature or 4 cubic ft. of material Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes The spell erupts from the surface of the mirroryouhold,strikingyourfoesquarein the chest and transforming it to glass. You transform the target into glass. You can cast either of these two versions: Glass Creature: As ﬂesh to stone (PH 232), but the subject becomes glass. Glass Object: An object of up to 4 cubic feet in volume is affected. Part of a larger object (such as a ﬂoor or wall) can be transformed by this spell. Glass has hardness 1, and 1 hit point per inch of thickness. Neither version of the spell affects magic items (magic items carried by a transformed creature remain intact). When the duration ends, the subject returns to its original materials. If the subject was broken or damaged while in glass form, its normal form has similar damage. Focus: A piece of glass from a mirror.  GLOWING ORB  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Magical, controllable light source Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No CallingonthelimitlesslightofthePositive Energy Plane, you coax a tiny portion of its power into a fragile glass sphere. This spell places a magical light source inside a glass sphere roughly the size of a human ﬁst. You can control the light level generated by a glowing orb by mental command (a standard action), provided that the orb is within 30 feet of you. The light level ranges from  no light at all to illumination within a 60-foot radius. There is no limit to the number of glowing orbs you can possess, and you can control their light levels independently or in concert. If a glowing orb is smashed, the magic is lost. If you die, however, an orb retains its magic. Any character with an Intelligence or Wisdom of at least 13 can gain control of an orb simply by touching it. Focus: A glass sphere (50 gp) into which the light is placed. An orb usable for this purpose has hardness 0 and 2 hit points.  GOLDEN BARDING  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Special mount touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Withaﬂash,aglowing,goldensuitofbarding for your special mount appears. You create a suit of barding for your mount to wear. The armor appears on your mount, ﬁtting perfectly. The golden barding you create has no armor check penalty and has no effect on your mount’s speed. The exact nature of the barding depends on your caster level. 2nd–3rd: Scale mail barding (+4 armor bonus). 4th–5th: Chainmail barding (+5). 6th–7th: Splint mail barding (+6). 8th–9th: Half-plate barding (+7). 10th+: Full plate barding (+8). You can cast magic vestment or other spells that target a suit of armor on the golden barding.  GOLEM STRIKE  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round A dim glow ﬁlls your eyes, allowing you to see—brieﬂy—weak points in the magic infused within a nearby construct.  hovering about them and forming wedges of positive energy.  Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  For 1 round, you can deliver sneak attacks against undead as if they were not immune to extra damage from sneak attacks. To attack an undead creature in this manner, you must  Youcreateacloudofsicklygrayenergythat streakstowardalivingcreature,wrapping it in the foul essence of unlife.  Transmutation [Good] Level: Bard 2, cleric 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  You create a silvery glow around your body that provides illumination to a radius of 60 feet. You gain a –20 circumstance penalty on Hide checks made while under the effect of this spell. For the duration of the spell, you gain a +2 sacred bonus to Dexterity, and your base land speed increases by 10 feet. Your touch attacks and any melee weapons you wield become infused with this power as well. They are treated as good-aligned weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  GRAVE STRIKE  Divination [Good] Level: Cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Golden motes of light dance before your eyes.Theyconvergeonundeadyoulookat,  Illus. by M. Phillippi  With a single word, you call upon the might and grace of your deity, bathing your body withdivineenergy.Yourbody glows with silvery light and you feel quick and light on your feet.  CHAPTER 1  GRACE  A skull-shaped cloud of gray energy strikes your target. The gray radiance is transferred to the creature, covering it entirely. For the duration of the spell, a living subject cannot regain hit points or ability score points by any means (undead creatures can still gain hit points), nor can the creature remove negative levels. Regeneration or fast healing abilities the subject has from any source are suppressed for the duration of the spell. Spells that heal damage do not work on that individual. The subject can improve its current hit points by boosting its Constitution score and can receive temporary hit points (from an aid spell, for example). When the spell ends, automatic healing abilities, such as a troll’s regeneration, and items that restore hit points, such as a ring of regeneration, begin to function again. Material Component: A skull.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  For 1 round, you can deliver sneak attacks against constructs as if they were not immune to extra damage from sneak attacks. To attack a construct in this manner, you must still meet the other requirements for making a sneak attack. This spell applies only to sneak attack damage. It gives you no ability to affect constructs with critical hits, nor does it confer any special ability to overcome the damage reduction or other defenses of constructs.  GREAT THUNDERCLAP  A rogue and a cleric of Olidammara, this halﬂing delivers a fatal blow to a vampire with the grave strike spell  still meet the other requirements for making a sneak attack. This spell applies only to sneak attack damage. It gives you no ability to affect undead with critical hits, nor does it confer any special ability to overcome the damage reduction or other defenses of undead creatures.  GRAYMANTLE  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No Yougripthebellinyourﬁstandraiseitover your head, intoning the spell and calling down a thunderous blast in the midst of those who oppose you. You create a loud noise equivalent to a peal of thunder. The spell has three effects. First, all creatures in the area must make Will saves to avoid being stunned for 1 round. Second, the creatures must make Fortitude saves or be deafened for 1 minute. Third, they must make Reﬂex saves or fall prone.  107  Creatures that cannot hear are not stunned, but might still fall prone. Focus: An iron bell.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  GREATER (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with greater is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a greater spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  Targets: Creatures in a 5-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Acrossthemurkyplain,abeamofradiance shoots down, highlighting your foes.  Illus. by D. Martin  GUIDED SHOT  Divination Level: Ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round With a guttural utterance madewithunmovinglips,you magicallyfocusyourattention on a distant foe. Upon aiming your weapon, you note how clearlydeﬁnedyourintended target is. While this spell is in effect, your ranged attacks do not take a penalty due to distance. In addition, your ranged attacks ignore the AC bonus granted to targets by anything less than total cover, and also ignore the miss chance granted to targets by anything less than total concealment. This spell does not provide any ability to exceed the maximum range of the weapon with which you are attacking, nor does it confer any ability to attack targets protected by total cover.  GUIDING LIGHT  Evocation [Light] Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)  108  A hail of stone spell pummels its target  Bright lights shine at the targets. The lights grant a +2 circumstance bonus on ranged attack rolls against any highlighted target. If a creature gains total cover or total concealment relative to you, or if it leaves the area, the spell ends for that target.  from your stomach. The tentacle has no eyes, but it ends in a set of snapping reptilian jaws. The tentacle created by the gutsnake spell is equivalent to a giant constrictor snake (MM 280) except that it is completely obedient to you and moves as you command. The snake has hit points equal to your own full normal total. Attacks against the snake cause you no discomfort and do not disrupt your spellcasting. If it is “killed,” the tentacle disappears without causing harm to you. The tentacle does not interfere with spellcasting in any way. Once each round as a free action, you can have the tentacle attack a creature up to 10 feet away with its bite attack, and if it successfully hits, the tentacle can use the snake’s improved grab ability to deal damage through constriction. In each round when the gutsnake is constricting a target, you cannot move more than 5 feet away from that target, unless the gutsnake makes a successful grapple check to carry the opponent with you when you move (see PH 155 for grappling rules). This is the only way in which the tentacle restricts movement. While the snake is present, you can use its Balance and Climb skill modiﬁers instead of your own, and you gain a climb speed of 20 feet. Focus: A fang from any reptile.  HAIL OF STONE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (5-ft. radius, 40 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You concentrate on the tooth, speak the words, and a 15-foot-long tentacle sprouts  You hold the jade chip before you and blow on it as you end the spell. The chip ﬂares  GUTSNAKE  with a green ﬂame and vanishes as rocks begin to fall on your pursuers. You create a rain of stones that deals 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 5d4) to creatures and objects within the area. Material Component: A piece of jade worth at least 5 gp.  The crystal globes in your hand vibrate intensely before turning ice-cold. As you hurl them, they resemble balls of ice, an observation borne true when they strike and shatter into a shower of ice crystals. You create frigid hailstones that strike your enemies. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit with a globe. Each hailstone deals 5d6 points of cold damage. For every ﬁve caster levels, you gain an additional hailstone (maximum of four stones at 20th level), and all globes must be aimed at enemies that are all within 30 feet of each other. Material Component: A handful of crystal globes.  HAMATULA BARBS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You invoke the dark nature of the spell and slender,sharp-edgedbarbssproutfromyour body and clothing, glowing with hellish energy. Any creature hitting the subject of this spell with a handheld weapon or a natural weapon takes 1d8 points of  Evocation [see text] Level: Blackguard 2, cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youcalluponyourbeliefsandagreatpairof handsappearsaroundyourtarget,cradling it in its power. The effect fades, but your target brieﬂy glows with a healthy orange nimbus. If your deity is non-evil, this spell grants a +2 sacred bonus on saving throws, and the spell is a good spell. If your deity is evil, this spell grants a +2 profane bonus on saving throws, and the spell is an evil spell. This spell works only on a creature with the same deity as you or the same alignment as your deity. If cast on a target that does not meet this criteria, the spell has no effect.  HAND OF THE FAITHFUL  Abjuration [see text] Level: Cleric 4, paladin 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You summon the protective ﬁeld, and the shimmering border limns out along the ﬂoor,carryingwithittheephemeralimage of blocking hands. You create an immobile zone of warding that is permeable to those of your religion but repels all others. Creatures that have the same deity as you, or are  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One frigid globe/5 levels Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  HAND OF DIVINITY  wearing the holy symbol of your deity, can enter and move within the warded area unhindered. Other creatures that try to enter or move within the area must make a Fortitude save each round or be stunned for 1 round. If the creature’s only action is to try to move completely out of the area, the ward does not hinder it. Once a creature succeeds on its saving throw, it is no longer affected by that casting of hand of the faithful. This spell has the alignment components of your deity, so if your deity is good and lawful, this is a lawful and good spell.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  HAILSTONES  slashing and piercing damage from the subject’s barbs. This damage does not apply to attackers using reach weapons, such as longspears. The subject itself is not harmed by its own barbs. Arcane Material Component: A barb from a hamatula.  HARDENING  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One item of a volume no greater than 10 cu. ft./level; see text Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You rub your hands along the length of the object, intoning the spell. A warm red glowemitsfromyourhands,strengthening the object. This spell increases the hardness of materials. Paper becomes harder to tear, glass becomes harder to break, wood becomes more resilient, and so on. For every two caster levels, add 1 point of hardness to the material targeted by the spell. This hardness increase improves only the material’s resistance to damage. Nothing else is modiﬁed by the improvement. For example, a longsword (treat steel as iron, base hardness 10) affected by a hardening spell cast by a 12th-level caster would have hardness 16 for the purpose of ignoring damage caused by someone making a sunder attack. The sword’s hit points, attack and damage modiﬁers, and other factors are not affected. A hardening spell does not in any way affect a substance’s resistance to other forms of transformation. Ice still melts, paper and wood still burn, rock still becomes transmutable to mud with the proper spell, and so on.  109  This spell affects up to 10 cubic feet of material per level of the caster. If cast upon a metal or mineral, the spell affects only 1 cubic foot per level. Material Component: An ointment made with 50 gp of diamond dust per 10 cubic feet of material.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  HARMONIC CHORUS  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes Sweeping your arm as if presenting a gift to someone, you call out to the intended subjectofyourspell.Amantleofsweettones settlesaboutyoursubject,whosefaceisnow twisted in concentration. Harmonic chorus lets you improve the spellcasting ability of another spellcaster. For the duration of the spell, the subject gains a +2 morale bonus to caster level and a +2 morale bonus on save DCs for all spells it casts. Focus: A tuning fork.  HASTE, SWIFT  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1d4 rounds Two quick syllables release the power of the spell, and the world moves a bit slower about you. This spell functions like haste (PH 239), except as noted above. This spell counters and dispels any slow effect on you.  HAUNTING TUNE  110  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Thespellwrappedwithinyourmusicmakes even the most hard-hearted quail. Targets that fail their saves become shaken.  HAWKEYE  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Bycryingoutlikeahawk,youimproveyour eyesight.Distantobjectsandcreaturesseem closer and more distinct. Your range increment for ranged weapons increases by 50%, and you gain a +5 competence bonus on Spot checks.  HEAL ANIMAL COMPANION  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Druid 5, ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Your animal companion touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youlayyourhandonyouranimalcompanion,andasyoudo,itseyesbecomeclearand focused, and it breathes easier. This spell functions like heal (PH 239), except that it affects only your animal companion.  HEALING LORECALL  Divination Level: Cleric 2, druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level With a mint leaf under your tongue, you whisper quiet words of soothing comfort. You feel a divine touch guiding your healing hand. A caster with 5 or more ranks in Heal can, when casting a conjuration (healing) spell, choose to remove any one of the following conditions affecting the subject of the spell, in addition to the spell’s normal effects: dazed, dazzled, or fatigued. A caster with 10 or more ranks in Heal can choose from the following conditions in addition to those above: exhausted, nauseated, or sickened. Also, when determining the amount of damage healed by your conjuration (healing) spells, you can substitute your total ranks in Heal for your caster level. The normal caster level limit for individual spells still applies; thus, a 3rd-level cleric with 6 ranks in Heal when under the effect of healing lorecall cures 1d8+5 points of damage with a cure light wounds spell. Material Component: A mint leaf.  HEALING STING  Necromancy Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: You and one living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Your palms tingle as you smash the dead wasps between your hands. The tingling intensiﬁes as you strike the opposing warrior, pulling his vitality into yourself. Focusing the power of negative energy, you deal 1d12 points of damage +1 per caster level (maximum 1d12+10) to a living creature and gain an equal amount of hit points if you make a successful melee touch attack. A healing sting cannot give you more hit points than your full normal total. Excess hit points are lost. Material Component: Five dried wasp bodies.  HEALING TOUCH  HEALTHFUL REST  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Adiffuseglowofgoldenlightspreadsfrom you, wrapping those you have chosen in a softnimbus.Thesubjectsofyourspelllook relaxed and rested, the stresses of the day forgotten.  Collecting material components can be a laborious process, so alchemists often offer them for sale  HEART OF STONE Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, F, XP Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 year  You feel a hard shove from within your chestasyouﬁnallycompletethecomplicated  Illus. by W. England  You transfer some of your life essence to the subject of the spell, healing it. You can heal up to 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6), and you decide how many dice to roll when you cast the spell. You take damage equal to half the amount your subject was healed. This spell cannot heal a subject of more damage than your current hit points +10, which is enough to kill you.  You exchange your own living heart for a ﬁnely crafted heart of perfect, unblemished stone, altering the nature of your body. Your living heart can be stored or hidden anywhere you like, where it continues to beat for the duration of the spell. While under the effect of heart of stone, you gain damage reduction 5/— and resistance to cold 5, ﬁre 5, and electricity 5, but are subject to the following disadvantages. Your rate of natural healing slows to only 1 hit point per day (regardless of character level or whether you rest). In addition, your own living heart is susceptible to attack; if it is damaged or destroyed, you are instantly slain. Heart of stone can be dispelled, in which case your living heart instantly returns to its proper place while the stone heart is transported to the place where you left your heart. Your heart and the stone heart likewise switch places if you enter an antimagic ﬁeld (temporarily negating the spell’s effects), but the spell resumes when you leave it. Stone to ﬂesh can also end the spell, though you get a Fortitude saving throw to resist. Focus: A carved stone heart of exceptional quality (jade, obsidian, or goldveined marble) worth 5,000 gp. XP Cost: 500 XP.  CHAPTER 1  The skin of your hands turns translucent,showingthemuscle and bone beneath. You touch your badly injured ally and feel yourownvitalityleaveyourbody and enter his damaged form.  phrasesandintricatemotionsofthistaxing spell. Sweat beads on your forehead and your breath comes shallow and fast. The rhythmic rush of sound in your ears that usuallyaccompaniessuchheavyphysical exertion is disquietingly absent.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Healthful rest doubles the subjects’ natural healing rate. Each affected creature regains twice the hit points and ability damage it otherwise would have regained during that day, depending on its activity level (PH 76).  HEART RIPPER  Necromancy [Death] Level: Assassin 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  111  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The assassin didn’t even bother to speak to the guards before he killed them with a heart ripper spell  Withasweepofyourhand,invisiblemagic slams into your target. With a bloody pop and squelch, the heart of your target bursts out its back, dropping the creature like a discarded rag doll. Invisible bolts of force instantly slay the target you designate by driving its heart from its body unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save. If the target has HD higher than your caster level, it does not die on a failed saving throw, but instead is stunned for 1d4 rounds. Creatures that don’t depend on their hearts for survival, creatures with no anatomy, and creatures immune to extra damage from critical hits are unaffected by the spell.  HEARTFIRE  Evocation [Light, Fire] Level: Bard 2, druid 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: Living creatures within a 5-ft.radius burst Duration: 1 round/level  112  Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes A ﬂickering red ﬁre bursts in the area you intended. Creatures in the area are outlinedintheﬂame,somemoreintensely than others. Outlined subjects shed light as torches. Outlined creatures do not beneﬁt from the concealment normally provided by darkness (although a 3rd-level or higher magical darkness effect functions normally),blur,displacement,invisibility, or similar effects. In addition, if they fail a Fortitude save, affected creatures take 1d4 points of ﬁre damage each round as their passions manifest as physically damaging ﬁre. Creatures that make a successful Fortitude save take only half damage each round for the duration of the spell (minimum 1 point per round). Spellcasters affected by this spell who try to cast spells must make Concentration checks (DC 10 + half the continuous damage last dealt) each round as they take continuous damage from the spell. The ﬁre created by this spell can be extinguished  by normal means; doing so ends the outlining effect.  HEAT DRAIN  Necromancy [Cold] Level: Cleric 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes The heat in the room seems to rush toward you,leavingeveryonearoundyouinbonechilling pain while you feel amazingly refreshed and alive. You drain the heat from all living creatures within the affected area except you. This inﬂux of warmth heals and empowers you. All affected living creatures take 1d6 points of cold damage per caster level (maximum 20d6). For every living creature that takes damage from this spell, you gain 2 temporary  hit points. The temporary hit points last for up to 1 minute per level.  HEATSTROKE  If the target creature fails to resist the spell, it immediately becomes fatigued. If it is already fatigued, it instead becomes exhausted. The subject takes 2d6 points of nonlethal damage from the oppressive heat as well, even if it makes the Fortitude saving throw to avoid fatigue or exhaustion. A creature wearing heavy armor takes a –4 penalty on its save. Creatures with immunity or resistance to ﬁre are not affected by this spell.  HEAVENLY HOST  Conjuration (Summoning) [Good, Lawful] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You invoke this spell and heavenly rays lance down from above. Out of these sparklingraysmanifestgreatglowingballs of power. The shadows of greater warriors coalesce within this light. When the spell is complete, 2d4 lantern archons (MM 16) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 hound archons (MM 17) appear. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil, Lawful] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Awaveofspectralﬁreburstsforth,andout ofthecurlingsmokestepsthehunchedform ofabarbazu,followedbyasecond,andother shadowy forms loom behind them. When the spell is complete, 2d4 bearded devils (MM 52) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 chain devils (MM 53) appear. Ten minutes after that, one bone devil (MM 52) appears. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell. The devils obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the devils. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  HERALD’S CALL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Any creature with 5 Hit Dice or less is slowed (PH 280) for 1 round. Creatures beyond the radius of the burst might hear the shout, but they are not slowed. An affected creature under the effect of a haste spell has the haste spell suppressed (not dispelled) for 1 round.  HEROICS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  With a wave of your hand and a few hissedwords,youcausethetargetcreature to suffer as if it had been toiling for hours on end under the merciless hammer of the desert sun.  HELLISH HORDE  By placing your hand to your mouth and calling out, you gain the attention of creatures around you. For a moment, all eyes snaptoyou.Somecreaturesseemreluctant or unable to pull their eyes away.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell. The creatures obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the creatures. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  Your heart swells with martial vigor and you feel like marching off to war. Upon touching your intended subject the desire to do battle wanes, but you see a hint of the lust for glory in the recipient’s eyes. The heroics spell temporarily grants the subject a feat from the ﬁghter’s bonus feat list. For the duration of the heroics spell, the subject can use the feat as if it were one of those the creature had selected. All prerequisites for the feat must be met by the target of this spell. Material Component: A bit of a weapon or armor that has been used in combat by a ﬁghter of at least 15th level.  HIDDEN LODGE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F; see text Duration: 24 hours You picture in your mind the desired appearanceofacamouﬂagedlodgeevenas youcompletethemotionsandwordsofthe spell.Whenyouﬁnish,youopenyoureyes and note a new feature in the landscape roughly the size of a house.  This spell functions like Leomund’s secure shelter (PH 247), except as noted here. The house created by hidden lodge  113  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  is perfectly camouﬂaged to blend in with whatever terrain or surroundings are appropriate. It might appear as a house-sized boulder in a rocky or mountainous area, as a sand dune in the desert, as a densely tangled thicket, a grassy knoll, or even a mighty tree. The lodge also obscures all telltale signs of habitation, including any smoke, light, or sound coming from within. At any distance of more than 30 feet, the lodge is indistinguishable from natural terrain. Any creature approaching within 30 feet is entitled to a DC 30 Survival check to spot the hidden lodge as an artiﬁcial dwelling and not a natural part of the landscape. Focus: The focus of an alarm spell (silver wire and a tiny bell), if this beneﬁt is to be included in the hidden lodge (see Leomund’s secure shelter for more information).  HIDE FROM DRAGONS  Abjuration Level: Assassin 4, bard 5, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature touched/ 2 levels Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Silently you make the motions and the dragon’s scale smolders in your hand. The rising smoke wraps around you and sinks into your skin. Dragons cannot see, hear, or smell the warded creatures, even with blindsense. They act as though the warded creatures are not there. Warded creatures could stand before the hungriest of red dragons and not be molested or even noticed. If a warded character touches or attacks a dragon or the dragon’s hoard, even with a spell, the spell ends for all recipients. Material Component: A dragon scale.  HIDE THE PATH  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6, druid 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes  114  Range: Anywhere in the area to be warded Area: Up to 200 sq. ft./level (S) Duration: 24 hours (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No After what feels like an hour, you ﬁnish the chant and rest your hands on the onyx sphere, envisioning the places you wish to protect from those seeking your secrets. Hide the path wards a large, continuous area against divination magic. The ward protects 200 square feet per caster level and can be shaped as you desire. The warded area can be as much as 20 feet high. Find the path won’t function in an area warded by hide the path. In addition, any spellcaster attempting to cast a 1st- through 6th-level divination spell in the warded area must make a caster level check (DC 11 + your caster level) or the spell fails. Higher-level divinations function normally. Hide the path has no effect on divination spells cast outside the warded area. Focus: A 6-inch onyx sphere mounted upon an obsidian stand; the entire focus must be worth no less than 1,000 gp. Any creature in physical contact with the focus can cast divination spells without restriction from the hide the path effect. If the focus is destroyed or brought beyond the boundaries of the hide the path spell, the spell is immediately dismissed.  HINDSIGHT  Divination Level: Bard 6, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 60 ft. Area: 60-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Therigorousritualofthespellﬁnallydraws to a close. You breathe a sigh of relief even asphantomimagesappearbeforeyoureyes, moving in reverse. Suddenly they cease their movements and seem more real. You watchasthephantomimagesplayouttheir partsinquicksuccession,showingyouthe knowledge of the past you seek.  You can see and hear into the past, getting a look at events that happened previously at your current location. The level of detail you see and hear by means of this spell depends on the span of time you wish to observe; concentrating on a span of days renders a more detailed perspective than a span of centuries, for example. You can view only one span of time per casting, chosen from the following options. Days: You sense the events of the past, stretching back one day per caster level. You gain detailed knowledge of the people, conversations, and events that transpired. Weeks: You gain a summary of the events of the past, stretching back one week per caster level. Exact wording and details are lost, but you know all the participants and the highlights of the conversations and events that took place. Years: You gain a general idea of the events of the past, stretching back one year per caster level. You notice only noteworthy events such as deaths, battles, scenes of great emotion, important discoveries, and signiﬁcant happenings. Centuries: You gain a general idea of the events of the past, stretching back one century plus an additional century for every four caster levels beyond 1st. For instance, a 16th-level caster would gain insight into the events of four centuries in the past, and a 17th-level caster would see back across ﬁve centuries. You notice only the most remarkable of events: coronations, deaths of important personages, major battles, and other truly historic happenings. Material Component: An hourglass-shaped diamond worth at least 1,000 gp.  HISS OF SLEEP  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: No From your hiding place, you whisper the spell softly, your words taking on a  HOLY MOUNT  Transmutation Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Your special mount Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Touching your special mount, you feel the divine power seep into your trusted friend and watch as a golden nimbus surrounds it. Your special mount gains the celestial template (MM 31) for the duration of the spell.  HOLY SPURS Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V  Youinvoketheholypowersandyourmount’s legs glow with a brilliant yellow radiance. This spell increases your special mount’s base land speed by 40 feet. This adjustment is treated as an enhancement bonus.  HOLY STAR  Abjuration Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Protective star of energy Duration: 3 rounds (D) By calling upon the power of your deity, you bring into existence a glowing mote of energy near your shoulder. While no brighter than a candle, the mote of light ﬁlls your body with an inner warmth and feeling of reassuring protection. You create a glowing mote of energy that stays near your shoulder, providing  HOLY STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Good, Water] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft. Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  The targets of this spell fall into a comatose slumber. Sleeping creatures are helpless. Slapping or wounding the subjects awakens them, but normal noise does not. Awakening a creature is a standard action.  Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Your special mount Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Illus. by J. Thomas  sonorous drone. One by one, your foes drop to ground, asleep.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The holy mount spell bolsters a paladin’s special mount with many useful resistances  light equal to that of a candle. This star has the following three functions, and you can designate which function to activate as a free action on your turn. Spell Turning: A holy star can turn a total of four to seven (1d4+3) spell levels, as the spell turning spell (PH 282). Any turning potential depleted through this use remains so for the duration of the spell; the holy star does not return to full capacity every time you choose this function. If its entire spell turning capacity is expended, this function no longer works, but the others do. Protection: A holy star gives you a +6 circumstance bonus to AC. Fire Bolt: A holy star lashes out with a beam of energy as a ranged touch attack against a creature (you choose the target) up to 90 feet away (no range increment). This attack uses your attack bonus and deals ﬁre damage equal to 1d6 points per two caster levels (maximum 10d6).  Youcallupontheforcesofgood,andaheavy rainbeginstofallaroundyou,itsraindrops soft and warm. A driving rain falls around you. It falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages evil creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (evil outsiders take double damage) at the beginning of your turn. Material Component: A ﬂask of holy water (25 gp).  115  HOLY TRANSFORMATION  Illus., by M. Cotie  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation [Good] Level: Cleric 7  This spell functions like lesser holy transformation, but when you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a hound archon (MM 16). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (archon, good, lawful), and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a hound archon (5 feet/5 feet). You gain a +4 sacred bonus to Strength and Constitution. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You gain a +4 sacred bonus on saving throws. You gain damage reduction 5/evil. Evil creatures within 10 feet of you take a –2 penalty on attack rolls and saving throws. You gain the ability to speak and understand Celestial.  Achargeofholyenergycoursesthroughyou, causing a barely visible golden aura to surroundyou.Youfeelaclosenesstoyourdeity as well as a noticeable increase in physical girth and power. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a protectar (Miniatures Handbook 66). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (good), and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a protectar (5 feet/5 feet). You gain a +2 sacred bonus to Strength and Constitution. You gain a ﬂy speed of 60 feet (good). You gain darkvision out to 60 feet.  Any creature that bites the spell’s subject must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or be nauseated until the end of its next turn. If a creature of animal Intelligence (2 or lower) fails its saving throw, it will not willingly bite the subject a second time; someone trying to direct the creature to bite the subject again must make a Handle Animal check as if he was trying to “push” the creature. This check must be made every time he tries to make the creature bite. Creatures that are immune to poison or that lack the ability to taste are unaffected by this spell. Material Component: A pinch of rotten meat.  HOWLING CHAIN  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One chain of force Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  HOLY TRANSFORMATION, LESSER Transmutation [Good] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  116  You gain a +2 sacred bonus on saving throws. You gain the ability to speak and understand Celestial.  A blood-red chain of pure force appears, howling instead of rattling as it shakes and twines.  Howling chain is tremendously useful against enemy spellcasters  HORRIBLE TASTE  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature or object touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No Afterafewmysticwords,youtouchapiece of rotten meat to the subject and it sinks inside the creature’s body.  You create a chain of force, which lashes out and attacks your enemies. The chain has a reach of 15 feet, but cannot move from the space you designate. The chain attacks by attempting to trip your foes (+12 melee touch attack, +15 on the opposed Strength check). It does not provoke attacks of opportunity for tripping, nor can it be tripped in response on a failed attempt. If it succeeds in tripping an enemy, it immediately follows up with a melee attack on the prone defender (+12 melee attack, 2d6+10 points of damage). Any creature struck by the chain must make a Will saving throw or become shaken. A howling chain can make one attack of opportunity each round for every four caster levels you have, using the same tactic as above. A howling chain has as many hit points as you do when you’re undam-  aged, and its AC is AC 20 (–1 size, +11 natural). It takes damage as a normal creature, but most magical effects that don’t deal damage do not affect it. It makes saving throws as its caster. Disintegrate or a successful dispel magic destroys it. Focus: A small length of platinum chain worth at least 500 gp.  Whatappearstobeamassivegizzardfrom a bird attempts to consume a creature you indicate. The gizzard pulses with glowing red blood and supernatural energy. A Large bulbous, ﬂeshy mass seethes into being around a single Medium or smaller target within range. The target can make a Reﬂex save to avoid becoming engulfed by the hungry gizzard, otherwise it is entombed within the disembodied digestive organ. If the target successfully saves, the gizzard immediately vanishes without further effect. Each round a creature remains trapped inside a hungry gizzard (starting in the round the spell is cast), the target creature is considered grappled and takes 2d8+8 points of crushing damage per round and 1d8 points of acid damage. While engulfed, the target creature can cast a spell only if the spell has no somatic component, the material components are in hand, and it makes a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level). An engulfed creature can cut its way out by using claws or a light slashing weapon to deal 25 points of damage to the gizzard (AC 12). Once the creature exits, the gizzard immediately melts into a pool of blood and meaty chunks. There is no immediate physical exit; the only way for those trapped inside to escape is to cut their way free, to dispel the spell, or to have allies outside destroy the gizzard. The gizzard is fairly easy to strike in combat from  HUNTERS OF HADES  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Cleric 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two summoned pack ﬁends, which can be no more than 30 ft. apart, or one retriever Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You evoke the dark powers and the ground splitsnearyou.Upfromthesmokingdepths comesapairofcreatures,eachresemblinga mating of wolf and cockroach. This spell summons either a single retriever (MM 46) or a pair of pack ﬁends (Planar Handbook 128) from the Gray Waste of Hades to serve you. The creatures magically understand your spoken commands (regardless of your language). They are treated as trained hunting beasts, so you can command them to track if you so choose. The creatures obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the creatures. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time. Material Component: A pinch of ash. If a retriever is summoned, a 500 gp bloodstone must also be used.  HUNTER’S MERCY  Transmutation Level: Ranger 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Youreyesglowred,butyouseetheworldas normalexceptwhenyoulookatyourtarget.  This transmutation makes a bow strike true. Your ﬁrst hit with a bow (not including crossbows) in the next round is automatically a critical hit. If you don’t hit in the round following the casting of this spell, the effect is wasted.  HURL  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  A small glowing dot reveals the creature’s weakest point.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  HUNGRY GIZZARD  a vantage point outside of its interior, due to its size (AC 4). A newly formed hungry gizzard has 5 hit points per caster level. The gizzard is treated like an unattended object for the purpose of saving throws. A hungry gizzard reduced to 0 hit points is immediately destroyed. Material Component: A dried gizzard.  Youpicturewithyourmind’seyethetarget weapon returning to its owner. Upon completion of the spell, the weapon glows with a dull yellow radiance. The hurl spell enhances one melee weapon so that it returns to the thrower after being thrown. For the duration of the spell, when thrown, the weapon returns to its wielder at the beginning of the wielder’s next action. The weapon returns whether it hit or missed its target. On its return, the thrown weapon hovers for 1 round next to the wielder and can then be seized and thrown again. After 1 round, the weapon falls to the ground. The weapon returns to its wielder only if thrown; it doesn’t automatically ﬂy back if dropped or seized by another creature. (An improvised weapon or a weapon not designed for throwing has a range increment of 10 feet.) Throwing a two-handed weapon is a full-round action.  HYMN OF PRAISE  Evocation [Good, Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 50 ft. Area: 50-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  117  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Yourheartlightandjoyful,youfeelasense of optimism as you launch into an inspiring melody. You can strike up a rousing, inspirational song that temporarily boosts by 2 the effective caster level of each goodaligned divine spellcaster within range. This increase does not grant access to additional spells, but it does improve all spell effects that are dependent on caster level. Within the spell’s area, each good-aligned divine spellcaster gains a +4 sacred bonus on Charisma checks to turn undead, and each evilaligned divine spellcaster takes a –4 sacred penalty on Charisma checks to rebuke undead.  This spell creates a battleaxe-shaped formation of jagged, fast-swirling ice shards in your hand. You are automatically considered proﬁcient with the ice axe. Attacks with the ice axe are melee touch attacks. The axe deals 2d12 points of cold damage +1 point per two caster levels (maximum +10) with a successful hit. You cannot be disarmed of the ice axe nor can it be sundered. Since the axe is virtually weightless, your Strength modiﬁer does not apply on  Illus. by W. England  HYPOTHERMIA  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 4, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./ 2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes The ﬁghter drops to her knees, her face pale and a bluish cast to her lips and ﬁngers. A cloud of frosted breath escapes her lips as she whispers, “So . . . c-c-cold . . .” The subject takes 1d6 points of cold damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) and becomes fatigued. A successful Fortitude save halves the damage and negates the fatigue.  ICE AXE  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Battleaxe-shaped weapon of swirling ice Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A thin layer of frost forms around your hand as shards of ice descend from the sky and coalesce into the form of a battleaxe.  118  Dwarf clerics employ the ice axe spell when ﬁghting ﬁery foes  damage rolls. If your base attack bonus is high enough to allow for multiple attacks in a round, you can make them with the ice axe. If you choose to hold something other than the ice axe in your hand or use the hand in some other way, the ice axe vanishes until the hand is empty again. Material Component: A shard of ice, glass, or crystal.  ICE CLAW  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 10-ft. ice claw Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You ﬁnish this evocation and a great white clawappearsbeforeyou,coldairwaftingoff its crystalline surface. This spell creates a massive reptilian claw made of ice. The ice claw can make one grapple attack per round. Its attack bonus and grapple modiﬁer are equal to your caster level + your Int modiﬁer or Cha modiﬁer (for wizards and sorcerers, respectively) + 7 for the claw’s Strength (24). In any round when the claw is grappling a target, it deals 1d8 points of cold damage. The claw can attack in the round it appears. Directing it to change targets is a standard action. It always attacks from your direction and does not get a ﬂanking bonus or help a combatant get one. The claw has as many hit points as you do when undamaged and has AC 20 (+10 natural). It takes damage as a normal creature, but most magical effects that do not deal damage do not affect it. The claw cannot push through a wall of force or enter an antimagic ﬁeld. It suffers the full effects of a prismatic wall or prismatic sphere. The claw has your saving throw bonuses. Disintegrate or a successful dispel magic destroys it. It has immunity to cold and vulnerability to ﬁre. Focus: A white leather glove and a piece of clear rock crystal.  ICE DAGGER  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Dagger of ice Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Themeltedicecuppedinyourpalmcrystallizes into a daggerlike shard of ice that then  ﬂies at your foe, exploding into a ball of icy fragments at its feet.  You can attack with your ﬁst in all respects as if you were wearing a +1 spiked gauntlet. The  ICELANCE  A lance of ice and earth thrusts up where you point, ﬂinging pebbles, rocks, and dirt into the sky. Stone rains down, covering the ground with debris. This spell causes moisture in the ground at a point you designate to freeze into a mound of solid ice covered by a layer of soil, which bursts violently through the surface. This ﬂings dangerous ice shards and small stones throughout the area, turning the surface of the ground in the spell’s area into dense rubble (DMG 90). The shards and stones deal 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6). Half the damage is cold damage. The origin point of the spell must be on the ground. This spell has no effect in desert terrain or on solid stone.  ICE GAUNTLET  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  An icelance spell pins a gnoll to a tree  +1 spiked gauntlet deals normal damage for your size and 1d4 points of cold damage. Damage reduction applies to the ice gauntlet’s normal damage, but it does not affect the cold damage. If you fail a saving throw against a ﬁre effect, the ice gauntlet melts and the spell ends.  ICE KNIFE  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Assassin 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: One icy missile Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial or Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One lance of ice Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by J. Nelson  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 6, druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No  You must succeed on a normal ranged attack to hit (with a +2 bonus on the attack roll for every two caster levels). If it hits, an ice knife deals 2d8 points of cold damage and 2 points of Dexterity damage (a successful Fortitude save negates the Dexterity damage). Creatures that have immunity to cold also take no Dexterity damage automatically. A knife that misses creates a shower of ice crystals in a 10foot-radius burst (see Missing with a Thrown Weapon, PH 158, to determine where the shard hits). The icy burst deals 1d8 points of cold damage to all creatures within the area (Reﬂex half). Material Component: A drop of water or piece of ice.  CHAPTER 1  ICE FLOWERS  You shake your hand as if to free it from some substance you disdain. As you do, a magical shard of ice blasts from your hand andspeedstoitstarget,thesoundofcracking ice following in its wake.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The ice dagger created by this spell launches itself at a target. Treat the attack as a thrown splash weapon (PH 158) that requires a ranged touch attack to hit. The ice dagger deals 1d4 points of cold damage to the target per caster level (maximum 5d4), and splash damage of 1 point of cold damage to adjacent creatures. MaterialComponent:Afew drops of water made from melted ice.  All warmth leaves your hand as at ﬁrst a sheen of white frost covers it, then larger crystals of clear ice form around it. In seconds a large bristling ball of rock-hard ice spikes surrounds your ﬁst, a cold mist enshrouding your forearm.  Youclutchthequartzinyourhand,focusing the energy of the spell into a sharp spear. With a thought, you send it whistling through the air at your foe. You must succeed on a normal ranged attack to strike a target with an icelance. You gain a +4 bonus on your attack roll. If you hit, the icelance deals 6d6 points of damage to the target. Half of this damage is piercing damage; the rest is cold damage. In addition, the target must make a Fortitude save or be stunned for 1d4 rounds. Regardless of the result of the attack, the icelance shatters upon its ﬁrst use. Focus: A 50-gp clear quartz gemstone. Alternatively, if you are in a cold region, you can substitute 10 pounds of ice or snow for the quartz.  119  ILLUSORY FEAST  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Illusion (Pattern) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your stomach growls as an entire feast appears in the distance. You perceive the composition of the feast continuously shifting,itscontentssometimesappealing to the point where you almost forget it is an illusion. Tantalizing food and drink appears, causing creatures in the area to stop what they are doing and eat. A creature in the area that fails its save stops its current activities, drops held or carried items, and begins consuming the illusory food and drink. The food looks, feels, smells, tastes, and even sounds real to the affected creature, and it appears to be whatever kind of food the creature prefers. The creature is considered dazed. An attack on an affected creature frees it from the spell immediately. Sightless creatures are affected by this spell due to its effect on all the senses. Creatures that do not eat are unaffected by this spell. Material Component: A piece of trail rations.  ILLUSORY PIT  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft. cube/level Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Will disbelief Spell Resistance: No You shove downward with your hand, speaking the spell’s arcane words as you do so. The ground disappears where you indicate, forming an impossibly deep pit. You create the illusion of a pit, and each creature entering or within the area is forced to make a Will save or believe the ﬂoor on which it stands has become a  120  bottomless chasm. Those that fail their saves fall prone and are unable to take any action except clawing desperately at the ﬂoor in the hopes of stopping their apparent fall. An attack on an affected creature frees it from the effect of the illusion but leaves it stunned for 1 round. Likewise, when the spell ends, creatures that believed they were falling are stunned for 1 round. Flying creatures passing over an illusory pit are unaffected by the spell.  IMBUE FAMILIAR WITH SPELL ABILITY Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Familiar touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Upon completion of this spell, you feel as if you had just cast a number of spells in quick succession. Your familiar gives you a knowing nod. This spell allows you to transfer a number of your spells and the ability to cast them into your familiar. Spontaneous spellcasters, such as sorcerers, can imbue a familiar with any spells they know how to cast, subject to the restrictions below. Arcanists who prepare spells, such as wizards, can imbue a familiar with any spell they have currently prepared. In either case, you can imbue one spell per three caster levels, with a maximum spell level of one-third your caster level, rounded down (maximum 5th level). Multiple castings of imbue familiar with spell ability have no effect on these limits. The transferred spell’s variable characteristics (range, duration, area, and so on) function according to your level. Once you cast imbue familiar with spell ability on your familiar, both the spell slot from which you cast the spell and the spell slots of the transferred spells remain unavailable for the preparation or casting of new spells until the familiar uses the transferred spells or imbue familiar with spell ability expires.  The spell can be dispelled; if this happens, the spells transferred are lost as if the familiar had cast them. In an antimagic ﬁeld, the familiar loses the ability to cast the imbued spells, but regains it again if it leaves the ﬁeld (as long as the spell’s duration hasn’t expired). If any transferred spell requires a focus or material component, you must have it on your person when the spells are cast (components are consumed as normal without requiring you to bring them to hand). Any XP costs from a transferred spell are deducted from your total when the familiar casts the spell.  IMPERIOUS GLARE  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One living creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youregardyourfoeswithasteelyglarethat would peel paint from a wagon. Motes of darkenergydancebeforeyoureyesandthey, to a body, freeze in fear. The targets must make successful Will saves or cower. The saving throw DC to resist this effect is either the normal save DC for the spell or the save DC for your natural frightful presence ability, whichever is higher. You cannot cast this spell if you do not have a frightful presence ability, either natural or magically bestowed (such as from the aura of terror spell, for example).  IMPLACABLE PURSUER  Divination Level: Assassin 4, blackguard 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level); see text Target: One creature Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  With this spell, you become an unerring tracker, instantly aware of your quarry’s location whenever it’s on the move.  Transmutation Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Withanelaborateﬂourishandcallforluck, you toss the dice in your hand into the air. Immediatelyyoufeelasthoughfatefavors you, ﬁlling you with conﬁdence. You gain access to a ﬂoating “pool” of luck, which manifests as bonus points you can use as desired to improve your odds of success at various tasks. This bonus pool consists of 2 points per caster level, which you can spend as you like to improve attack rolls, skill checks, and ability checks, although no single check can receive a bonus greater than one-half your caster level. You must declare any bonus point usage before the appropriate roll is made. Used points disappear from the pool, and any points remaining when the spell ends are wasted. These points count as luck bonuses for the purpose of stacking. For example, a 14th-level bard pauses while chasing a pickpocket to cast improvisation. At any time during the next 14 rounds, he could use the points to provide himself a +7 luck bonus on a  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Creatures in a 10-ft. burst Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast this spell and your opponent is swallowed in a spiral of sparkling motes that urge your targets to act. Affected creatures are not allowed to delay or to ready an action. If a subject is currently delaying, it acts as soon as the spell is cast. If the subject currently has an action readied, it loses that action.  INCORPOREAL ENHANCEMENT  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One incorporeal undead/ level Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Calling upon the dark power of the Plane of Negative Energy, you bolster the power of incorporeal undead. The undead affected by this spell gain a +1 deﬂection bonus to Armor Class, +1d8 bonus hit points, a +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls, and a +2 bonus to turn resistance. Each of these enhancements improves by the base amount for every ﬁve caster levels beyond 5th, so that a 20th-level caster grants undead +4 to AC, +4d8 bonus hit points, +4 on attack rolls, and +8 to turn resistance.  Necromancy [Death] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 50-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes A novaofdissolutiondissipates theimmaterial bodies of incorporeal and gaseous creatures, destroying them instantly. The spell destroys 1d4 HD worth of creatures per caster level (maximum 20d4) in the area. Usually, creatures such as shadows, wraiths, spectres, ghosts, and similar creatures are destroyed, though vampires and living creatures in gaseous form are also affected, as are other incorporeal creatures. Creatures with the fewest HD are affected ﬁrst; among creatures with equal HD, those that are closest to the point of origin of the burst are affected ﬁrst. No creature with 9 or more HD is affected, and HD that are not sufﬁcient to affect a creature are wasted.  CHAPTER 1  IMPROVISATION  INCITE  INCORPOREAL NOVA  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The implacable pursuer spell gives you the direction and distance to the target creature whenever it ﬁnishes a turn more than 10 feet away from where it started. If you are a ranger, you apply your favored enemy bonus to the DC of the Will save. Once you successfully target a creature with implacable pursuer, you know its location as long as the subject is moving, no matter where it goes on the same plane. Even if it leaves the plane, implacable pursuer tells you what plane the subject creature went to. The spell then provides no further information until you and the subject creature are on the same plane, in which case the spell resumes functioning normally.  Spot check, a +7 luck bonus on a Climb check, and a +7 luck bonus on two of his attacks. Material Component: A pair of dice.  INDOMITABILITY  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level or until discharged Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Thespell’senergymakesyoufeelimpervious to wounds, if only for a limited time. The indomitability spell protects its recipient from the ﬁrst incapacitating attack the creature suffers during the spell’s duration. An incapacitating attack is one that would reduce the recipient to fewer than 1 hit point. The attack must be one that deals damage; the indomitability spell offers no protection from nondamaging effects or attacks that kill or destroy without dealing any damage, such as death effects. Regardless of how much  121  damage the attack deals, the recipient of the indomitability spell takes only enough damage to be reduced to 1 hp. The remaining damage from the attack is ignored. Once the spell protects the subject in this manner, the spell is discharged.  and reach of a bone devil (10 feet/10 feet). You gain a +4 profane bonus to Strength and Constitution and darkvision out to 60 feet. You gain damage reduction 5/good. You also grow a tail like that of a scorpion. Whenever you take a full  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  INFERNAL THRENODY Evocation [Evil, Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: 50 ft. Area: 50-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by C. Frank  INFERNAL TRANSFORMATION Transmutation [Evil] Level: Cleric 7  This spell functions like lesser infernal transformation, except when you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a bone devil (MM 52). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (baatezu, evil, lawful), and your size changes to Large. You have the space  122  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Your blood runs cold as a feeling of utter evil imbues you with unholy power. A cackle of sadisticgleeescapesyourchanging mouth, and you feel your body grow in both size and power.  Themelodyyoucreateisalowbut melodious dirge that blankets the area in a barely perceptible red aura. You feel invigorated with dark power. You can strike up a pulsing, powerful rhythm that temporarily boosts by 2 the effective caster level of each evil-aligned divine spellcaster within range. This increase does not grant access to additional spells, but it does improve all spell effects that are dependent on caster level. Within the spell’s area, each evil-aligned divine spellcaster gains a +4 profane bonus on Charisma checks to rebuke undead, and each good-aligned divine spellcaster takes a –4 profane penalty on Charisma checks to turn undead.  INFERNAL TRANSFORMATION, LESSER  Indominability makes a deadly blow merely dangerous  attack action, you can use the tail to make an additional attack each round at your highest attack bonus. A successful attack deals 3d4 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer. This attack overcomes damage reduction as if it were an evil weapon. Creatures hit by the tail attack must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 character level + Con modiﬁer) or be subjected to poison (injury, initial damage 1d6 Str, secondary damage 2d6 Str). Your equipment grows to match your new size and form, allowing the tail attack to function even if you are wearing heavy armor or other restrictive clothing. You gain the ability to speak and understand Infernal.  When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a bearded devil (MM 52). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (baatezu, evil, lawful), and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a bearded devil (5 feet/5 feet). You gain a +2 profane bonus to Strength and Constitution and darkvision out to 60 feet. You grow a snaky beard. Whenever you take a full attack action, you can use the beard to make an additional attack each round at your highest attack bonus plus all appropriate modiﬁers. A successful attack deals 1d8 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer. This attack overcomes damage reduction as if it were an evil weapon. Creatures hit by the beard attack must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 character level + Con modiﬁer) or be affected by the devil chills disease (DMG 292). You gain the ability to speak and understand Infernal.  INFERNAL WOUND  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You wave your hands over the blade and it takes on a gray pallor. Its attacks will now leave a lingering, painful memory in their wake.  INFERNO  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./ 2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 6 rounds; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates and Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast this spell and a spiral of dark motes surrounds your foe, slowing and distracting him from the task at hand.  INKY CLOUD  The infestation of maggots spell harms and horriﬁes its victims  Youtouchyourfoewiththedustofdeadﬂies onyourﬁngers,givingbirthtohundredsof writhing maggots in his ﬂesh. With a successful melee touch attack, you infest a creature with maggotlike creatures. If the touched creature fails a Fortitude saving throw, the magical maggots deal 1d4 points of Constitution damage each round at the beginning of your turn. The subject makes a new Fortitude save each round to negate the damage in that round and end the effect. The infestation can be removed with a remove disease or heal spell.  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by D. Martin  You inhibit your foe from acting. The subject is forced to delay until the following round, acting immediately before you on your initiative count.  Singling out the target, you call upon elemental forces to surround it in ﬁre. The target of the inferno takes 6d6 points of ﬁre damage unless it makes a Fortitude save. In each round thereafter, the ﬁre deals 1d6 fewer points of damage (minimum 1d6) until the spell ends or the subject manages to extinguish the ﬂames. Thus, the ﬁre deals 5d6 points of damage in the second round, 4d6 points in the third round, and so forth. Flammable, nonmagical items carried by the target automatically fail their saves to resist this damage. After the ﬁrst round, the subject can attempt a DC 15 Reﬂex save as a full-round action to extinguish the ﬂames before taking additional damage. Rolling on the ground (the subject becomes prone) allows the target a +2 bonus on this save. Leaping into a large body of water or magically extinguishing the ﬂames automatically ends the effect. Material Component: A gob of beeswax.  INHIBIT  CHAPTER 1  Necromancy Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/2 levels Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Material Component: A handful of dead, dried ﬂies.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A creature injured by a weapon with infernal wound cast upon it loses 2 additional hit points each round for the duration of the spell (regardless of how many times it is struck during that time). The continuing hit point loss can be stopped by a Heal check (DC 10 + spell level + your relevant ability modiﬁer), a cure spell, or a heal spell.  INFESTATION OF MAGGOTS  Blackbubblesofinkboilupfromthevialin your hand and quickly spread to ﬁll all the water around you with darkness, blocking your vision. You create an inky cloud that billows out from your location. The cloud obscures all sight, including darkvision, beyond 5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has concealment. Creatures farther away have total concealment. A moderate current disperses the cloud in 4 rounds; a strong current disperses the cloud in 1 round. This spell functions only underwater.  123  Material Component: A small vial containing the ink of a squid or octopus.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  INSIDIOUS RHYTHM  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You recite a foolhardy ditty, tapping your foot in time. With a wink and a grin you mark your target, who shortly thereafter follows suit. The subject takes a –4 penalty on Intelligence-based skill checks and Concentration checks due to an endlessly recycling melody stuck in its mind. Whenever the subject attempts to cast, concentrate on, or direct a spell, it must succeed on a Concentration check (DC equal to insidious rhythm’s save DC + spell’s level) or fail at the attempt.  INSIGHTFUL FEINT  Divination Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round With a chuckle you whisper the words that will make your ruse more effective. You gain a +10 insight bonus on the next single Bluff check that you make to feint in combat (if it is made before the start of your next turn). You can make the feint as a move action, or once as a free action if you have the Improved Feint feat.  INSPIRATIONAL BOOST Enchantment (Compulsion) [MindAffecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal  124  Target: You Duration: 1 round or special; see text Youconcentrateonassistingyourfriendsas youbegintheshortchantandsimplehandchoppingmotionnecessarytocastthespell. Asyouﬁnish,thespell’schantallowsyouto segue easily into bolstering your allies. While this spell is in effect, the morale bonus granted by your inspire courage bardic music increases by 1. The effect lasts until your inspire courage effect ends. If you don’t begin to use your inspire courage ability before the beginning of your next turn, the spell’s effect ends.  INSTANT LOCKSMITH  Divination Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round You point at a mechanism, twist your hand,andmakeaclickingsoundwithyour tongue. You now have a better idea of how the mechanism works. You can make one Disable Device check or one Open Lock check in this round as a free action. You gain a +2 insight bonus on the check.  INSTANT REFUGE  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Until discharged Yousetinvisiblearcanetriggerswithinyour mindandbody,allowingyoutoescapegreat peril in an instant. This powerful variant of the contingency spell automatically transfers you and everything you carry or touch (except for other creatures or objects that weigh more than 50 pounds) to a locale you name. When casting instant refuge, you must specify the locale and detail up to six  speciﬁc conditions that trigger the spell. When any of these situations occurs, you are whisked away to the location. The location can be any place you have visited, even on another plane. Material Component: A concoction made from demon skin and rare herbs worth 250 gp. XP Cost: 100 XP.  INSTANT SEARCH  Divination Level: Assassin 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round By pointing at a small area nearby and whistling brieﬂy, you release the power of the spell, granting you knowledge of the area you indicated. You can make one Search check in this round as a free action. You gain a +2 insight bonus on the check.  INTERPLANAR MESSAGE  Evocation [Language-Dependent] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: See text Target: One creature Duration: 24 hours/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourspellcreatesabondbetweenyourself and the creature you touch, a bond unbroken even by the distance between planes. This spell allows you to send a limited message of twenty-ﬁve words or less to the targeted creature, who can be on another plane when the message is received. Casting the spell takes a standard action, during which you touch the creature you intend to communicate with. That creature should be able to understand a language you know (otherwise, when the magic is activated, the creature knows that you sent the message, but has  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: You plus one willing creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youcrushtheeggshellsasyoucastthisspell, indicatingyourcomradesintheparty.Now, regardlessofwheretheymightendup,you will able to communicate with them. This spell functions like Rary’s telepathic bond (PH 268), except that the communication functions both on the same plane and across planes. Material Component: Pieces of eggshell from two different kinds of creatures.  INVISIBILITY, SUPERIOR  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal or touch Target: You or a creature or object weighing no more than 100 lb./ level  Asyoucompletethespell,yoursensesdull somewhat.Uponreleasingthespell’senergy on your desired subject, your senses clear, although the spell’s recipient can no longer be perceived. This powerful glamer functions like invisibility (PH 245), except that it masks image, scent, and sound alike, concealing the subject from all senses except touch. As with greater invisibility, this spell doesn’t end if the subject attacks. While invisible, the subject exudes no scent and is undetectable by scent, blindsense, tremorsense, and blindsight. Superior invisibility renders the recipient immune to detection by see invisibility,faerieﬁre,glitterdust,invisibilitypurge,anddustofappearance,although creatures under the effect of the spell can be detected by true seeing. Certain mundane conditions (such as leaving footprints) can also render a subject detectable.  INVISIBILITY, SWIFT Illusion (Glamer) Level: Assassin 2, bard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  Withawhisperedsyllableyoucompletethe spell. You notice that others look past you as if you weren’t there. This spell functions like invisibility (PH 245), except as noted above.  IRON BONES  Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 A brief ﬂash engulfs your undead ally, and throughitsﬂeshyoucanseeitsskeleton.The skeleton glows a dusky red for a moment. This spell functions like stone bones (page 208), except that the subject creature’s skeleton changes to iron. The creature gains a +6 natural armor bonus to AC.  Arcane Focus: A miniature skull made out of iron or steel.  IRON SILENCE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 2, bard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One suit of armor touched/ 3 levels Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object)  CHAPTER 1  INTERPLANAR TELEPATHIC BOND  Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  no idea what the message is). At any time afterward, you can send your interplanar message to that creature. The message pops into the target’s mind, awake or asleep, and the target is aware that the message has been delivered. If the message arrives when the target is asleep, it might appear as a vivid dream that the target remembers upon awakening. This spell does not obligate nor force the creature you communicate with to act. The target cannot reply to tell you its plans or intentions. The message travels through the Astral Plane to reach its target, so the spell cannot reach planes separate from (not coterminous to or coexistent with) the Astral Plane. You can have only one interplanar message active at any given time.  As you imitate a clanking noise you brush your hand over the armor you wish to silence. The armor glows softly orange for a moment before the glow fades. A closer look reveals what looks like orange grease in the joints of the armor. While this spell is in effect, the armor check penalty from the affected suit or suits of armor does not apply on Hide and Move Silently checks. Only wearers proﬁcient in the armor’s use get this beneﬁt when wearing the affected armor. The armor check penalty still applies to other skill checks as normal.  IRONGUARD  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F, M This spell functions like lesser ironguard, except that the subject you touch is immune to magic metal as well. Material Component: A tiny shield of wood, glass, or crystal. Focus: A small nugget of adamantine worth 100 gp.  IRONGUARD, LESSER  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  125  Illus. by L. Parillo  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  With few words and a gesture, a necromancer gives his skeletal allies bones of iron  Youwatchasyourtarget’sskinlightensand takes on a translucent look. The subject of lesser ironguard becomes immune to nonmagical metal. Metal items (including metal weapons) simply pass through you, and you can walk through metal barriers such as iron bars. Magic metal affects you normally, as do spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects. Attacks delivered by metal items (such as poison on a dagger) affect you normally. If the spell expires while metal is inside you, the metal object is shunted out of your body (or you away from the metal, if it is an immovable object such as a set of iron bars). You and the object each take 1d6 points of damage as a result (ignoring the object’s hardness for determining damage to it). Because you pass through metal, you can ignore armor bonuses from nonmagic metal armor on opponents you attack with unarmed attacks. Material Component: A tiny shield of wood, glass, or crystal.  126  IRONGUTS  Abjuration Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You mutter the spell and uncork a bottle with a noxious concoction of scorpion venom, toad sweat, adder venom, and the strained brains of carrion crawlers. The poisonous liquid evaporates into a black cloud that surrounds your hand as you reach out to touch the target. You enable a creature to better ﬁght off the effect of poison. The subject is ﬁlled with antitoxin and gains a +5 alchemical bonus on Fortitude saves against all kinds of poisons, whether injury, contact, ingestion, or inhalation. After the spell ends, the subject is nauseated for 1 round.  Material Component: A vial containing the diluted poison of four different creatures.  IRONTHUNDER HORN Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  The last words of your spell boom out with athunderingroar,knockingthefoesinyour path off their feet. You create a deep resonant vibration that can shake creatures off their feet. Creatures in the area must succeed on a Reﬂex saving throw or fall prone.  JAGGED TOOTH  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 2 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One natural slashing or piercing weapon of target creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  JAWS OF THE WOLF  JOYFUL NOISE  Abjuration Level: Bard 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you  The junglerazer spell turns forest to ash and ruins plant creatures  You create sonic vibrations that negate any magical silence effect in the area. This zone of negation moves with you and lasts as long as you continue to concentrate. The silence effect is not dispelled but simply held in abeyance; it remains in effect outside the area of the joyful noise effect.  JUNGLERAZER  Necromancy Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by C. Dien  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One or more created worgs Duration: 1 round/level (D)  You turn small wooden carvings into a number of worgs (MM 256) equal to one for every two caster levels. These worgs appear between you and your opponents. They act on their own but obey your mental commands. If the worgs move beyond the range of the spell, or at the end of the spell, the worgs become carvings again. Killing a worg destroys its focus item. Focus: One carving of a worg for each that you create (25 gp each).  Youstompyourfootontheground,creating a ripple of noise that unleashes suppressed sounds behind it.  CHAPTER 1  This spell doubles the critical threat range of one natural weapon that deals either slashing or piercing damage. Multiple effects that increase a weapon’s threat range don’t stack.  You cast small wooden statuettes on the ground and they immediately grow into adult worgs. The worgs growl at your foes, their jaws slathered with spittle.  Duration: Concentration; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You feel your own teeth sharpen momentarily as you complete this spell. As the magical energy surrounds your intended target, it ﬂexes its muscles in appreciation of its weapon’s deadlier capabilities.  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  127  Illus. by J. Thomas  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Invisibledestructiveenergyspringssilently forth from you, instantly destroying all natural plant life in the area and leaving a path of ash in its wake. Fey, vermin, plants and plant creatures, and animals caught in the area take 1d10 points of negative energy damage per caster level (maximum 10d10). Material Component: A pinch of ash from a burnt plant.  JUNGLE’S RAPTURE  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living nonplant creature Duration: Permanent (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Spitting, you curse the creature, knowing that in days it will be either dead or just another weed. As you watch, its body becomesmorerigid,andtheﬁrstwhorlsof wood grain can be seen on its skin. The creature targeted by this spell immediately takes 1d6 points of Dexterity drain. This drain manifests as a hardening of the limbs and skin as the victim’s ﬂesh slowly turns to wood. Each day that passes, the victim takes an additional 1d6 points of Dexterity drain. Even if drained points are restored (through restoration, for example), the target creature still takes Dexterity drain each day until the spell is lifted. Once a victim of jungle’s rapture is drained to 0 Dexterity, it immediately transforms into a normal plant of the same size as its original body. Aside from radiating an aura of transmutation magic, the plant is a normal plant with no Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma scores. Jungle’s rapture is a curse, and as such it cannot be dispelled. It can be removed with a break enchantment, limited wish, miracle, or wish spell. Remove curse works only if the caster level of that spell is equal to or higher than your caster level at the time you cast jungle’s rapture.  KELPSTRAND  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 2  128  The kelpstrand spell entangles and grapples its target  Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You stretch out your hand and long strands of wet kelp streak out to envelop your foes. Make a ranged touch attack at each target. If you hit a creature, you immediately make an opposed grapple check against the creature as a free action without provoking attacks of opportunity. You add your caster level and your Wisdom bonus to the result of your grapple check rather than your Strength bonus and size bonus. If you succeed, the target becomes entangled in the thick strands of kelp and is grappled. Each round, the target can attempt to escape the kelpstrand by making a successful grapple or Escape Artist check against the kelpstrand’s grapple check. You are not considered grappling yourself while using this spell. Once you shoot your strands of kelp, you need not take any action to maintain the effect. A creature targeted with multiple kelpstrands has to make separate grapple or Escape Artist checks against each kelpstrand currently grappling it to escape. If you cast this spell while  you are within 300 feet of the ocean shore, you gain a +4 bonus on any grapple checks made to determine the outcome of a kelpstrand grapple. Material Component: A piece of dried seaweed.  KISS OF THE VAMPIRE Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  Drawing upon the powers of unlife, you give yourself abilities similar to those of a vampire. You become gaunt and pale with feral, red eyes. You gain damage reduction 10/magic, and you can use any one of the following abilities each round as a standard action. • enervation, as a melee touch attack • vampiric touch, as a melee touch attack • charm person • gaseous form (self only) While you are using this spell, inﬂict spells heal you and cure spells hurt you. You are treated as if you were undead for the purpose of all spells and effects. A successful turn (or rebuke) attempt against an undead of your Hit Dice  Transmutation (Teleportation) Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 5 ft./2 levels; see text Target: You Duration: Instantaneous The ground before you appears overlaid with a chessboard pattern, with certain squares of the chessboard glowing softly red.Timestopsforyouasyoumovewithout walking to the indicated location. You can teleport with a limited distance and a circumspect form of movement. You can instantly move up to 5 feet per two caster levels with this spell, but you must end this movement in a square that leaves you ﬂanking an enemy.  KNOW GREATEST ENEMY  Divination Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Your eyes ﬂash green, turning golden as yoursurveyyouropponents.Toyoureyes, the weakest of them are limned with a pale greennimbus,whichintensiﬁeswithpower. Themostpowerfuliswrappedinabrilliant, shimmering green aura.  CR 4 or lower 5–10 11–15 16 or higher  Strength Weak Moderate Strong Overwhelming  Among creatures within the same category, you know which is the most powerful, but not why. For example, among a group of ogres (CR 2), you would know one of them (an ogre with two levels of barbarian, CR 4) was the most powerful, but not know if it was because the ogre had class levels, a template (such as half-ﬁendish), or for another reason. Any spell of 3rd level or higher that prevents scrying attempts on a creature (such as nondetection) or an area (such as false vision) thwarts this spell’s ability to evaluate that creature or creatures within that area.  KNOW OPPONENT  Divination Level: Bard 3, cleric 3 Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youfeelyoureyesglowwithmagicalenergy asyoucompletethespell.Youseeluminous words appear in the air above your spell’s target. The words describe the creature’s strengths or weaknesses, as you desire. You gauge the strengths and weaknesses of an opponent to gain combat advantages. Upon casting this spell, you learn a number of strengths or weaknesses of the target equal to one, plus one strength or weakness per two caster levels (maximum four). You can choose to learn strengths, weaknesses, or some combination thereof that you specify. If a creature has more strengths or weaknesses than you can learn with a single casting, you learn the most powerful ones ﬁrst. Thus, if a monster can use ﬁnger of death at will and has resistance to sonic 5, you would learn about ﬁnger of death ﬁrst.  Strengths can include attack forms and special abilities (including spelllike abilities or supernatural abilities). Weaknesses include vulnerability to an energy type. For example, suppose a 7th-level cleric casts know opponent on a blackarmored warrior, choosing to learn one strength and two weaknesses. The warrior fails his save, and the DM informs the cleric’s player that the opponent has the ability to drain energy (a strength), is adversely affected by sunlight, and can be repelled by a holy symbol (both weaknesses). The cleric then concludes that he faces a vampire and breaks out the wooden stakes.  CHAPTER 1  KNIGHT’S MOVE  This spell evaluates the creatures in the area and determines the relative power level of each. Creatures are evaluated as follows.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  requires you to make a Will saving throw (DC 10 + turning character’s Cha modiﬁer) or be panicked (or cowering) for 10 rounds. A turn attempt that would destroy (or command) undead of your Hit Dice requires you to make a Will save (DC 15 + turning character’s Cha modiﬁer) or be stunned (or charmed as by charm monster) for 10 rounds. Any charm effect you create with this spell ends when the spell ends, but all other effects remain until their normal duration expires. Material Component: A black onyx worth at least 50 gp that has been carved with the image of a fangmouthed face.  KNOW VULNERABILITIES  Divination Level: Bard 2, cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your eyes turn red, then take on a golden hue. As you look at the creature, you see small runes dancing around its head. Each rune identiﬁes a particular vulnerability orresistance—redforresistances,greenfor vulnerabilities. You learn any special qualities, vulnerabilities, and resistances the target creature has. Vulnerabilities include anything that causes the creature more than the normal amount of damage (such as a creature with the cold subtype having vulnerability to ﬁre or a crystalline creature’s susceptibility to the shatter spell). Resistances include any effects that reduce or negate damage the creature takes and immunities to particular attacks. The spell identiﬁes resistances and vulnerabilities granted by spell effects. For example, if cast upon a balor, you learn that it has damage reduction 15/cold iron and good; spell resistance 28; immunity to poison, ﬁre, and electricity; resistance to acid 10 and cold 10; and that it does not have any particular vulnerabilities.  129  Illus. by M. Phillippi  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  LAND WOMB  Abjuration Level: Druid 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: You and one other creature/ level Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Others watch you speak the spell, and the earth opens up and swallows you whole. You remain safe and secure beneath the ground, untouched by events above. You cannot enter a land womb through stone or rock, only through tillable soil. The land womb holds you secure 10 feet below the surface. Anyone in a land womb cannot be perceived by divination spells of 4th level or less. You can bring one additional creature per caster level with you into the land womb. All creatures to be brought into the land womb must be touching each other (for instance, holding hands in a ring). Land womb creates an underground space large enough to hold all target creatures. While space is tight, spellcasting by targets is still possible while in the conﬁnes of the spell’s effect. You can no longer hear or see anything on the surface by nonmagical means. You can end the spell at will, but those who are with you cannot. At the end of the spell’s duration, all within the land womb return to the spot where they stood before the spell took effect.  LANGUOR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes  130  Withalowthrummingsound,abluebeam lances from your ﬁnger to strike your foe and weaken him.  Rushing to the body of your fallen ally, you call out magic words that will bring back life and breath to your friend.  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. This ray causes creatures it hits to become weak and slow for the spell’s duration. A struck creature takes a penalty to Strength equal to 1d6+1 per two caster levels (maximum 1d6+10). In addition, a subject that fails a Will save is slowed. The spell’s slow effect counters and is countered by haste.  Last breath restores life to a recently deceased creature, creating a new body for the returning spirit to inhabit. However, the spell must be cast within 1 round of the victim’s death. This spell functions like reincarnate (PH 270), except that the reincarnated creature receives no level loss, no Constitution loss, and no loss of spells. The creature has –1 hit points (but is stable). Material Component: Rare oils and unguents worth a total of at least 500 gp, spread over the remains.  LAUNCH BOLT  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One crossbow bolt in your possession Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The crossbow bolt in your hand glows a bright red, then ﬂies off at your foe.  Lawful sword gives a paladin the upper hand over chaotic foes  LAST BREATH  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Dead creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You cast this spell on a crossbow bolt, causing it to ﬂy at a target of your choice as if you had ﬁred it from a light crossbow, using a ranged attack roll. The bolt has a range increment of 80 feet. Any properties of the crossbow bolt (such as magical abilities, masterwork quality, and so on) or feats you possess (such as Point Blank Shot, Weapon Focus [light crossbow], and so on) apply. Drawing a bolt for this spell is a free action. Material Component: The crossbow bolt to be ﬁred (1 sp).  LAUNCH ITEM  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One Fine item in your possession, weighing up to 10 lb.  You hold the item and windmill your arm in an underhanded toss. When it leaves your hand, it is bathed in an orange glow and ﬂies farther than you could throw any item.  You instantly gain an overview of the area around you. Lay of the land gives basic information relevant to major landmarks, such as rivers, lakes, and settlements (of at least hamlet size). It indicates the direction and distance to each from the current location. You have a good understanding of the terrain up to 50 miles from your current location. Unlike ﬁnd the path, this spell does not give information on traps, passwords, or impediments to a journey. Arcane Focus: A small piece of lodestone.  You cause a Fine item in your possession to ﬂy at great speed to a target or location you specify, out to medium range (100 ft. + 10 ft./level). This spell is normally used to launch dangerous items (ﬂasks of acid, thunderstones, and so on) farther than you could normally throw them. You can use this spell to make an attack with a splash weapon. If you choose to do so, you must make an attack roll as normal, but you suffer no penalties for range.  LAWFUL SWORD  Evocation Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Callingtomindthoughtsofjustice,yourun your ﬁngers along the weapon, imbuing it with power. This spell functions like holy sword (PH 242), except as follows. The weapon functions as a +5 axiomatic weapon (+5 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls, lawful-aligned, deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against chaotic opponents). It also emits a magic circle against chaos effect (as the spell).  LAY OF THE LAND  Divination Level: Bard 4, druid 4, ranger 1 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 3 rounds Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Youcastthisspellandaresurroundedwith a nimbus of green light. In your mind, a mapunfoldsofthesurroundingarea,show-  LEGION’S (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name formerly began with legion’s has been renamed to a mass spell, and is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name.  LESSER (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with lesser is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a lesser spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  LIFE BOLT  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Up to ﬁve rays Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Holdingyourpalmoutward,youintonethe spell and empower it with a bit of your own life. A golden ray beams forth from your hand, striking an undead creature where its heart should have been. You draw forth some of your own life force to create a beam of positive energy that harms undead. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to  strike a target. You must make a ranged touch attack to hit, and if the ray hits an undead creature, it deals 1d12 points of damage. Creating each beam deals you 1 point of nonlethal damage. For every two caster levels beyond 1st, you can create an additional ray, up to a maximum of ﬁve rays at 9th level. If you shoot multiple rays, you can have them strike a single creature or several creatures. You must designate targets before you check for spell resistance or roll damage. All rays must be aimed at enemies that are all within 30 feet of each other.  LIFE WARD  CHAPTER 1  ing the cities, hamlets, and known ruins as ifpennedbyacartographer.Thelightfades but the knowledge of the map remains.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Abjuration Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes With a brush of your hand you surround the creature in crawling shadows, a cloak of negative energy that whirls and swims across the creature’s body. A creature warded by this spell gains protection from the effects of positive energy, including magical healing. The spell can be cast upon undead to offer additional protection against the turning abilities of clerics. The subject is immune to all positive energy effects, including conjuration (healing) spells, channeled positive energy such as from the turn undead ability, or other effects that derive their power from positive energy. This spell offers protection from the blinding effect of the Positive Energy Plane, and warded creatures gain no temporary hit points while there.  LIFE’S GRACE  Abjuration Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  131  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You say a brief prayer and touch your holy symbol to a creature. Symbols of warding and safety appear and ﬂow out to cover the creature in a web of protective magic beforefadingfromsight,absorbedintothe creature’s form. The living creature touched becomes immune to all death spells, magical death effects, energy drain, and any negative energy effects. In addition, the subject is immune to undead special attacks that deal ability damage, ability drain, and magical disease (such as mummy rot), even if these attacks do not have a magical source. (For example, the spell prevents poison damage from the poisonous bite of an undead creature.) This spell does not prevent such attacks from undead originating from spells, magic items, or class abilities; only the special attacks from the undead’s base nature are affected. In addition, the subject’s armor or clothing is considered ghost touch armor, and its armor bonus counts against incorporeal attacks. (A suit of clothing is considered armor that gives +0 AC for this purpose, though it can be enhanced with spells such as magic vestment.) This spell doesn’t remove negative levels that the subject has already gained, nor does it affect the saving throw necessary 24 hours after gaining a negative level.  LIGHT OF LUNIA  Evocation [Good, Light] Level: Celestia 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target and Effect: You and up to two rays; see text Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) or until discharged; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text You invoke the powers of good and you begin to glow with the silver light of fabled Lunia,theﬁrstlayeroftheSevenMounting Heavens of Celestia.  132  The silvery radiance created by this spell emanates from you in a 30-foot radius, and dim light extends for an additional 30 feet.  Beginning one turn after you cast this spell, you can choose to expend some or all of the light of Lunia as a ray of light. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. You can make a single ranged touch attack that deals 1d6 points of damage, or 2d6 points of damage against undead or evil outsiders, with a range of 30 feet. Spell resistance applies to this attack. This dims your silvery radiance to half (15-foot light, with dim light for an additional 15 feet). You can choose to ﬁre one additional ray with the same characteristics either on the same round or on a subsequent round. Firing the second ray quenches your radiance and ends the spell.  LIGHT OF MERCURIA  Evocation [Good, Light] Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 This spell functions like light of Lunia, except that the radiance created is golden. Your light rays deal 2d6 points of damage, or 4d6 points of damage against undead and evil outsiders.  LIGHT OF VENYA  Evocation [Good, Light] Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 This spell functions like light of Lunia, except that a softy pearly radiance is created. Your light rays deal 3d6 points of damage, or 6d6 points of damage against undead and evil outsiders. Alternatively, you can choose for the ray to heal 1d6 points of damage + your divine spellcaster level (maximum 1d6+10) to a living, non-evil creature.  LIGHTFOOT  Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Youmutterthewordsofthisshortspelland dive down the hallway, dancing between the armed guards and out the gate. You provoke no attacks of opportunity when moving.  LIGHTNING RING Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Effect: Ring of electricity Duration: 1 round/2 levels Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Your body quakes as a ring of crackling electricityexplodesfromyourchesttowhirl about you. The ring of electricity moves with you and does not interfere with your spellcasting or attacks, or with others attacking you. As long as the lightning ring is in effect, you gain resistance to electricity 20. At the beginning of your turn each round, adjacent creatures take 10d6 points of electricity damage, or half that with a successful Reﬂex save. In addition, each round as a free action at the beginning of your turn, you can direct two lightning bolts that deal 5d6 points of electricity damage each, exactly as the lightning bolt spell (caster level 5th), in any directions you choose. Each bolt can be aimed separately. A creature struck by one of these bolts can make a Reﬂex save for half damage. The DC for this save is calculated for an 8th-level spell, even though the bolts mimic a 3rd-level spell. Material Components: A small glass ring and a bit of fur from any animal.  LIONHEART  Abjuration [Mind-Affecting] Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youtouchyourallywhileintoningthespell. Where your ﬁnger touches, a warm glow appears, then fades. The subject gains immunity to fear effects.  Material Component: A hair from a lion’s mane.  LION’S CHARGE  or sack, the DC of the Listen check increases by 5. The coins continue to function no matter how far apart they are, although they fall silent if they’re on different planes. Focus: The pair of coins.  LISTENING LORECALL  This spell grants you the pounce special ability (MM 313), allowing you to make a full attack at the end of a charge.  You feel conscious of your ears as they warm noticeably. Sounds that seem as though they should be mufﬂed become clear to you.  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Cleric 8, Courage 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous or 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial or Will negates (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes or Yes (harmless); see text  LIVELY STEP  You open your mouth and emit a tremendous roar, a sound like a lion but as loud as a mountain falling. All enemies within the spell’s area take 1d8 points of sonic damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d8) and are stunned for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save halves the damage and negates the stunning effect. In addition, all allies within the spell’s area gain a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls and saves against fear effects, plus temporary hit points equal to 1d8 + caster level (to a maximum of 1d8+20 temporary hit points at caster level 20th).  LISTENING COIN Divination (Scrying) Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S, F  A wizard uses the lightning ring spell to shock her foes  Rubbing two coins together with your ﬁngers, you whisper arcane words into them. Holding one to your ear surreptitiously, you hand over the other. You turn two ordinary coins into magic listening devices—one a sensor and the other a receiver. After casting the spell, you simply give the sensor coin away, either surreptitiously or overtly. By holding the receiver coin up to your ear, you can hear whatever transpires near the sensor as if you were there (much like a clairaudience effect). If the sensor coin is in a pocket, pouch,  Illus. by W. England  You gain a +4 insight bonus on Listen checks. In addition, if you have 5 or more ranks in Listen, you gain blindsense out to 30 feet. If you have 12 or more ranks in Listen, you gain blindsight out to 15 feet. A silence spell or effect negates the blindsense or blindsight granted by a listening lorecall spell.  LION’S ROAR  CHAPTER 1  You cast the spell and a nimbus of yellow energy in the form of a lion surrounds you.  Divination Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Magical sensor Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: Up to 12 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Beating a small drum and singing a marching tune, you exhort your allies to struggle on. Once you cast this spell, the speed of you and all allies within 30 feet of you increases by 10 feet. You and other affected creatures can only beneﬁt from this spell by refraining from taking any actions other than move actions. When one of the affected creatures takes any other kind of action, this spell ends. Focus: A small drum.  133  LIVING PRINTS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Divination Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level You eyes glow green and you can now see the trails laid down almost a month ago, as clearly as if your quarry had just passed through. You perceive tracks as if they had just been made. You must notice the prints normally with a successful Search or Survival check, but this eliminates any penalties to your tracking due to the passage of time or any rainfall since the making of the trail. This spell has no effect on tracks more than thirty days old.  LIVING UNDEATH  Necromancy Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You invoke the will of your gods and your skin sags and becomes sallow, your eyes hollow, and your ﬂesh foul and rotted. This spell imparts a physical transformation upon the subject, not unlike the process that produces a zombie. While the subject does not actually become undead, its vital processes are temporarily bypassed with no seeming ill effect. The subject is not subject to sneak attacks and critical hits for the duration of the spell, as if it were undead. While the spell is in effect, the subject takes a –4 penalty to its Charisma score (to a minimum of 1).  LOVE’S LAMENT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3  134  Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Dirgelike music ﬁlls the area, reminding those in range of lost loves and life’s disappointments. Creatures within the area of this spell that fail their saves take 1d6 points of Wisdom damage and are nauseated for 1d4 rounds.  LOW-LIGHT VISION  Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You pass your hand over the subject’s eyes and murmur the arcane words. Its eyes grow larger, and when it opens them, the pupils are speckled with tiny silvers of starlight. The subject creature gains low-light vision. Arcane Material Component: A small candle.  LOYAL VASSAL  Abjuration [Lawful] Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One willing creature touched/3 levels Duration: 10 minutes/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Upon invoking the divine words, glowing silverrunesencircleyourallies’heads.The runes quickly fade, but the resolve they instilled remain.  You protect the subjects against mindaffecting spells and abilities, giving them a +3 sacred bonus on saving throws against such effects. The spell also helps prevent them from being magically compelled to harm you or anyone else affected by this spell. Any attempt to make a loyal vassal do so (whether the originating effect occurred before or after this spell was cast) counts as a suicidal order, triggering appropriate responses and possibly ending the controlling spell. If the subjects willingly attempt to harm you, the spell is broken for them immediately.  LUCENT LANCE  Transmutation [Light] Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text The eternal energies of light and darkness you call upon to cast this spell cause the ambient light near you to coalesce around the crystal rod in your hand. The light erupts in a coruscating beam of radiance shaped like a needle-sharp lance. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck is blinded for 1 round, and dazzled for 1 round per caster level. A creature sensitive to bright light (such as a drow, duergar, or kuo-toa) takes penalties as if it had been exposed to full daylight for 1 round if struck by the beam, even if it resists the spell’s other effects. In addition to this dazzling effect, lucent lance deals damage based on the level of light available within your square. In bright light, it deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6). In shadowy illumination, it deals 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d4). If no light is present in your square, the spell cannot be cast at all. Focus: A clear glass or crystal rod.  LUMINOUS GAZE  Evocation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  You can choose to inﬂict one of the following conditions upon any creatures that fail their saving throws.  Withanincomprehensibleword and the touch of a hand wrapped in black magic, you reduce your foe to a screaming lunatic.  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8  Lucent lance bores a hole through a shadow  Hysteria: The subjects fall into ﬁts of uncontrollable laughing or crying (equal chance for either). This hysteria affects subjects as though they were nauseated; they are unable to attack, cast spells, concentrate on spells, or do anything else requiring attention. The only action a subject can take is a single move action per turn. Panic: The subjects become panicked. If cornered, a panicked creature cowers.  Maelstrom causes a deadly vortex to form in water. A body of water in which you form the maelstrom must be at least 120 feet wide and 60 feet deep, or the spell is wasted. Waterborne creatures or objects within 50 feet of the vortex (below and on all sides) must make successful Reﬂex saves or be sucked in. Trained swimmers can attempt Swim checks instead if their skill modiﬁer is higher than their Reﬂex save bonus. Waterborne vessels avoid being sucked in if their operators make Profession (sailor) checks against the same DC as the spell’s saving throw. These creatures and objects take 3d8 points of damage upon being sucked in. Once inside, creatures and objects take 3d8 points of bludgeoning damage each round at the beginning of your turn. They remain trapped for 2d4 rounds, after which time they are ejected to any square adjacent to the bottom of the vortex (your choice). Ejected subjects might be sucked back into the vortex, but they receive a new Reﬂex save. Subjects of Large or smaller size are ejected from the bottom of the  Illus. by J. Engle  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Madness 8 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1d4+1 rounds Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  MADDENING WHISPERS  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 8, Ocean 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: A whirlpool 120 ft. wide and 60 ft. deep Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No Whirling about your hand and pulling itdown,yourmagicreachesoutanddoes the same to the water but on a titanic scale, creating a vortex of sucking waves.  MADDENING SCREAM  This spell makes it impossible for the victim to do anything other than race about caterwauling. The creature must move its speed each turn, unless somehow prevented, and can take no other action. The spell gives the subject a –4 penalty to Armor Class, its Reﬂex saving throws fail except on a roll of 20, and the subject cannot use a shield.  MAELSTROM  CHAPTER 1  This spell causes your eyes to glow with an unearthly radiance. The glow from your eyes provides light as per the light spell. Each creature within a 20-foot radius of you is dazzled as long as they remain with range. Sightless creatures are unaffected.  Asyoumutterthisspell,yourwordsburrow intoyourfoes’mindslikehungrymaggots, spawning dark and disturbing thoughts.  Violent Hallucinations: The subjects perceive any nearby creatures as dangerous enemies, attacking the nearest ones and ﬁghting until the subjects are slain or until no more creatures are in sight. Stupor: The subjects curl up on the ﬂoor and remain oblivious to events around them. Characters in a stupor are effectively stunned and prone. SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  At the corners of your vision you see a brightly glowing light. Wherever you look, that area ﬁlls with light as bright as a torch.  Components: V Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  135  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  An aquatic druid can wreak havoc with the maelstrom spell, all the while unseen by his foes  vortex. Larger subjects are ejected from the top.  MAGE ARMOR, GREATER  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S An invisible sheen of armor-shaped force surrounds you. This spell functions like mage armor (PH 249), except that it requires no material component and its tangible ﬁeld of force provides a +6 armor bonus to Armor Class.  MAGE ARMOR, MASS  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  136  You feel arcane energy encompass you, granting you a sense of serenity. As you chooseyourtargetsforthespell,youseeeach one glow brieﬂy with a silver aura. This spell functions like mage armor (PH 249), except that it affects multiple creatures.  MAGE HAND, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One object or creature weighing up to 40 lb. Duration: Concentration Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youcastthespell,andyourhandissuffused with a ghostly white radiance. You point your ﬁnger at the target across the room, and it slowly rises in the air.  A greater mage hand spell can lift an object and move it at will from a distance. As a move action, you can propel the target up to 20 feet in any direction, although the spell ends if the distance between you and the subject ever exceeds the spell’s range. A creature can negate the effect against an object it possesses with a successful Will save or if you fail to overcome its spell resistance. An object can be telekinetically manipulated as if with one hand. For example, a lever or rope can be pulled, a key can be turned, an object rotated, and so on, if the force required is within the weight limitation. The spell has an effective Strength of 10.  MAGIC FANG, SUPERIOR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal  Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youspeaktheoldwordsoftheincantation, and your hands glow with a yellow aura that ﬂashes at the tips of your digits.  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No A thick, sparkling cloud of billowing mist rolls into being from the point you indicate. This potent spell conjures a cloud of mist that functions as a solid fog spell (PH 281). In addition, any spells cast within the fog have a –4 penalty to the spellcaster’s caster level, and the save DC of any such spell is reduced by 2. Creatures within the fog, or that enter the fog, must succeed on a Will save or suffer the reduction in caster level and DC even after they leave the fog, for the duration of the spell. Material Component: A small piece of quilted cloth, which must be soaked in water while the spell is cast.  MALEVOLENT MIASMA Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 15-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No  You click the stones together in your hand and a gray fog, tinged with darker, malevolentstreaks,springsupinthemidst of your enemies.  Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast a spell that reaches into another plane and pulls another creature to your realm. You can cause one creature on a coexistent plane (DMG 150), along with its personal belongings, to suddenly appear on your plane of existence. An affected creature appears in the location analogous to the space it occupied on the coexistent plane. For example, the make manifest spell allows you to cause a target on the Ethereal Plane to appear on the Material Plane, and vice versa. This spell does not grant the ability to pinpoint the location of ethereal creatures. For the duration of the spell, the target creature retains all its abilities except for those that allow it to enter other planes. For example, a ghost brought in from the Ethereal Plane would be unable to return to the Ethereal Plane but would remain incorporeal. At the end of the spell’s duration, the target creature returns to whatever plane it was on before it was targeted by the spell, even if it has moved beyond the range of make manifest.  MAKE MANIFEST, MASS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Area: 25-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Saving Throw: None  This spell functions like make manifest, except that all creatures and unattended objects on coterminous and coexistent planes within the area of this spell are instantly brought onto your plane. For the duration of the spell, the target creatures retain all their abilities except for those that allow them to enter other planes. At the end of mass make manifest’s duration, objects and creatures return to their plane of origin, even if they have left the spell’s area. Material Component: A handful of copper dust.  CHAPTER 1  MAGIC MIASMA  MAKE MANIFEST  You toss a handful of copper dust into the air, and it clings to creatures invisible to you. Suddenly they’re visible and in your presence.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Superior magic fang gives every natural weapon you possess an enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls equal to +1 per four caster levels (maximum +5 at 20th level).  The spell produces a toxic fog that deals 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per level (maximum 5d4). Creatures in the area that hold their breath are still subject to the effect. Creatures that are immune to poison are not affected by this spell. Focus: Three polished gray stones.  MANTLE OF CHAOS  Abjuration [Chaos] Level: Cleric 3, Limbo 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You invoke the powers of chaos, and a ﬂickering yellow ﬁeld of anarchic energy surrounds you. The power of this spell grants you spell resistance equal to 12 + your caster level against spells with the lawful descriptor.  MANTLE OF EVIL  Abjuration [Evil] Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, Hades 3 You invoke the powers of evil, and a dark, wavering ﬁeld of unholy energy wraps around you like a cloak. This spell functions like mantle of chaos, except that mantle of evil grants spell resistance against spells with the good descriptor.  MANTLE OF GOOD  Abjuration [Good] Level: Cleric 3, Elysium 3, paladin 3  137  You invoke the powers of good, and a shimmering white ﬁeld of holy energy swaddles you.  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  This spell functions like mantle of chaos, except that mantle of good grants spell resistance against spells with the evil descriptor.  MANTLE OF THE ICY SOUL  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 6, druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One pair of disembodied, ﬂying jaws per caster level (maximum ten pairs) Duration: Concentration, up to 3 rounds Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes You clamp your teeth together with the lastgesture,andseveraldisembodiedjaws of blue force appear and ﬂoat toward your foes, gnashing their teeth.  The subject creature gains the cold subtype, granting it immunity to cold and vulnerability to ﬁre (the creature takes half again as much damage from ﬁre effects). A ﬁre creature subjected to this spell does not gain the cold subtype, but it loses the ﬁre subtype for the duration. Material Component: A pinch of sapphire dust worth 10 gp.  MANTLE OF LAW  You invoke the powers of law, and a constant blue ﬁeld of axiomatic energy surrounds you. This spell functions like mantle of chaos, except that mantle of law grants spell resistance against spells with the chaotic descriptor.  MANYJAWS  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  138  MARK OF THE HUNTER  Divination Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature, which must be a favored enemy Du ration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes By pointing your ﬁnger at oneofyourfavoredenemies, you mark it with a glowing rune that only you can see.  As you touch the creature, a chill sweeps through you and down yourarm.Asthespelltakeseffect, the creature’s body changes hue, becoming an icy blue.  Abjuration [Law] Level: Cleric 3, Mechanus 3, paladin 3  amount with a successful Reﬂex save. A creature targeted by multiple pairs of jaws in a single round makes only one saving throw, with success halving the total damage. Material Component: A pair of teeth.  Manyjaws gives wizards a potent offense they can use while taking other actions  When you cast this spell, you summon several pairs of mystical, disembodied jaws that ﬂy about and attack your foes. These pairs of jaws can be commanded to attack separate targets, or multiple pairs can be sent to attack a single foe. The jaws originate at your location and ﬂy out to attack their targets, moving at a ﬂy speed of 40 feet with perfect maneuverability. You can redirect as many of the jaws as you desire as a standard action. Each round on your action, each pair of jaws automatically hits its target and deals 1d6 points of damage, or half that  Your favored enemy bonuses against a foe with a mark of the hunter are 4 higher than they would otherwise be. Furthermore, the rune limns your enemy, making the foe easier for you to attack. The subject of a mark of the hunter spell gains no bonus to Armor Class against your attacks from any cover less than total cover, nor does it gain a miss chance against your attacks from any concealment less than total concealment. Other effects that grant a miss chance (such as incorporeality) work normally. Material Component: A bit of skin or bone from the relevant favored enemy type or subtype.  MARK OF THE OUTCAST  Necromancy Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 2, druid 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Youselectyourvictimforpunishmentand invoke the ancient words of anathema. A dull purple splotch in the shape of a skull manifests itself on your victim’s ﬂesh, visible to all.  Divination Level: Assassin 2, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 24 hours/level By holding the small item to your nose and reciting the ancient words of power you unleash the spell. You immediately have a sense of the object’s owner such that you believe you could ﬁnd further indications of the creature’s passage. Upon casting this spell, you become attuned to the speciﬁc creature that owns the spell’s focus item. (A creature is considered to own an item if it was the last creature to carry the item on its person for 24 hours or more. You do not count when considering what creature was last to carry an item.) This attunement grants you a +10 bonus on Search and Survival checks made to track the item’s owner or ﬁnd evidence of the owner’s passage. This spell does not give you insight into who or what the creature you are attuned to is or where that creature ultimately might be. Also, the spell does not provide a trail that is not already there nor provide you with the beneﬁt of the Track feat. Arcane Focus: An object owned by the creature or a piece of the creature to be tracked, such as a tuft of hair or a ﬁngernail.  MASTER AIR  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youholdafeatheraloftandintonethespell. Great translucent wings unfold from your back. You leap up and are airborne. You sprout a pair of insubstantial feathery or batlike (your choice) wings. You can ﬂy at a speed of 90 feet with good maneuverability (60 feet if you’re wearing medium or heavy armor). Using master air requires as much concentration as walking, so you can attack or cast spells normally. You can charge but not run, and you cannot carry aloft more weight than your maximum load (PH 161), plus any armor you wear. Should the spell duration expire while you are still aloft, the magic fails slowly. You drop 60 feet per round for 1d6 rounds. If you reach the ground in that amount of time, you land safely. If not, you fall the rest of the distance, taking falling damage normally. Since dispelling a spell effectively ends it, you also fall in this way if the master air spell is dispelled. Focus: A wing feather from any bird or the wing bone of any bat.  MASTER EARTH  Transmutation Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Thegroundbelowyourfeetsuddenlyseems insubstantial, and you sink below the sur-  You travel straight through the earth itself to a destination you choose. The movement is instantaneous and has no distance limitations (though the location must be on the same world). You need only think of where you want to go. If you don’t think of an exact location, the earth carries you to the periphery of the general area you imagine. The earth never leaves you stranded inside it. It always puts you back to the surface even if it cannot deliver you to your chosen destination. It takes you as far as it can. Underground, creaturebuilt structures don’t hinder you as long as you can move around them. This spell functions only on the Material Plane. Focus: The fossil of any animal.  CHAPTER 1  MARKED OBJECT  Any spell whose name begins with mass is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a mass spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  face,movingthroughdirtandstoneaseasily as if you were ﬂying through the air.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell creates an indelible mark on the subject’s face (or other upper body part, if the subject doesn’t have a head). The mark is visible to normal vision, low-light vision, and darkvision. The wearer of such a mark takes a –5 circumstance penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and a –2 penalty to Armor Class. The mark cannot be dispelled, but it can be removed with a break enchantment,limitedwish,miracle,removecurse, or wish spell.  MASS (SPELL NAME)  MASTER’S TOUCH  Divination Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Holding aloft an item you wish to use effectively, you address it directly with a command to obey your desire to wield it. You gain proﬁciency with a single weapon or shield you hold in your hands when the spell is cast. The lack of a somatic component means the spell can be cast in the middle of a ﬁght while you keep ready whatever items stand between you and danger. Proﬁciency is granted for only a single, speciﬁc item, although multiple castings allow for multiple proﬁciencies. For example, if you hold a short sword and a rapier, with a buckler strapped to your off hand, you could cast the spell three times, once for each weapon and once for the shield. This spell does not grant proﬁciency for a kind or category of item (such as short swords) but only for the one speciﬁc item held in your hand at the time the spell is cast (this short sword). Should you set that item down or otherwise lose your grip on it, the proﬁciency does not transfer to a dif-  139  ferent item of the same kind you might pick up. However, if you recover the original item before the spell’s effect runs out, you are still proﬁcient with that speciﬁc weapon or shield for the duration. Focus: The item in whose use you wish to be proﬁcient.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  MAW OF CHAOS  Abjuration [Chaotic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 15-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes At the culmination of casting the spell you open your mouth wide as if to yawn. In imitation,theaircracksandsplits,opening into a yawning area of roiling blue-green energy resembling a great mouth. All creatures in the area take 1d6 points of damage per caster level in the round when you cast the spell and each round thereafter at the start of your turn. Those damaged must also make a Will saving throw or be dazed for 1 round. Second, the chaotic energy makes it difﬁcult to concentrate. Any activity that involves concentration (such as casting a spell or using a spell-like ability) requires a Concentration check (DC 25 + spell level) to succeed. Creatures with the chaotic subtype are unaffected by this spell. Material Component: A jawbone with teeth.  MAW OF STONE  Transmutation Level: Cavern 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One cave mouth or natural tunnel up to 20 ft. in diameter Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No The rock comes alive, opening into a huge maw of deadly stone.  140  You cause a single natural opening or natural chamber to become animated. The opening or chamber cannot move, but it can attack. You can order it to attack any creature, or a speciﬁc type of creature. You also can order it to attack under a speciﬁc circumstance, such as when creatures try to leave or when they touch something. An animated opening can attack only creatures that try to move through it. An animated chamber can attack every creature inside. Only one maw of stone can be in effect on a particular opening or chamber at a time. The animated opening has an attack bonus equal to your level +10. The maw of stone deals damage equal to 2d8 points + your caster level. An animated opening can make one immediate attack against a creature passing through. If it succeeds, the target must make a Reﬂex save or it cannot pass through the maw. The animated stone has an Armor Class of 15 and hardness 8. Dealing 60 points of damage to it ends the spell.  MECHANUS MIND  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Lawful, Mind-Affecting] Level: Mechanus 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You speak the words of the spell and your mind feels clearer and more organized, as if it were mere drawers where everything wasputinitsproperplace.Yourfacegrows calmerandunexpressive,butyourthoughts are more rational and ordered. The subject gains a +4 resistance bonus on Will saving throws to resist mindaffecting spells and abilities. While in the grip of Mechanus mind, the subject also becomes more analytical and less emotional. The subject gains a +2 competence bonus on Intelligence-based checks, but takes a –2 penalty on Charisma-based checks.  MEMORY ROT  Evocation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You blow across your open palm at your opponent, and your breath coalesces into a cloud of glowing yellow spores that surround your foe’s head, driving through its scalp into the brain beneath. You create a cloud of spores that infests the brain of the subject creature, gradually destroying its mind. The spores deal 1d6 points of Intelligence damage immediately. The spores then gradually eat away at the subject’s brain, dealing 1 point of Intelligence drain each round thereafter at the beginning of your turn. The subject can attempt a Fortitude save each round to combat the effect of the spores. A successful save ends the spores’ advance and halts any further Intelligence drain.  MESMERIZING GLARE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One living creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You say nothing, but your eyes glow with a warm, friendly ﬁre. Others stop to regard you, and once enraptured, they cannot look away. Directing your gaze toward the target creatures, you cause them to stop and stare blankly at you. Creatures that fail their saving throws become fascinated.  METAL MELT  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Nonmagical metal object weighing up to 5 lb./level Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  MIND POISON  Evocation Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 3 rounds/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You hiss out a red mist that streaks toward your target despite prevailing winds and claws into his mouth and nose, choking him. By ﬁlling the subject’s mouth and throat with unbreathable gas, you prevent it from doing much more than coughing and spitting. An affected creature cannot speak, cast spells with verbal components, use breath weapons, or utter command words to activate magic items, but it can otherwise act normally. The subject can hold its breath for 2 rounds per point of Constitution  Metal melt can cause a metal weapon to run like water  MIASMA OF ENTROPY  Necromancy Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area or Target: Cone-shaped burst or one solid object; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half or Will negates (object); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Du ration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  MIASMA  Miasma of entropy causes accelerated decay in all wood, leather, and other natural materials in the spell’s area. It destroys nonmagical objects of wood, leather, paper, and other formerly living organic matter. All such objects within the area rot into slimy, pulpy masses. Objects weighing more than 1 pound per caster level are not affected, but all other objects of the appropriate composition are ruined. Alternatively, you can target miasma of entropy against a single solid object of nonliving nonmagical organic matter that weighs up to 10 pounds per caster level.  Illus. by D. Martin  You alter the physical properties of a metal object so that it runs like water. The melted metal does not change temperature but ﬂows as a liquid for 1 round and then returns to its normal solid state, usually in a form resembling a puddle. An item in a creature’s possession is allowed a Will save, using the creature’s saving throw bonus unless its own is higher. Material Component: A drop of mercury in a vial.  A red mist rises from the ground as you intone this spell, billowing outward from you.Withinityouseeleavescurlup,scrolls rot from their spindles, and the leather armor of your foes drip from their vulnerable forms.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You uncork the vial and pour out its contents, and the armor you designate begins to soften and ﬂow.  but must make a Constitution check (DC 10 +1 per previous success) each round thereafter to continue doing so. Failure on any such check (or voluntary resumption of breathing) causes the subject to fall unconscious (0 hp). On the next round, the subject drops to –1 hit points and is dying; on the third round, it suffocates (DMG 304).  You spit on your ﬁngers and whip your hand in a snakelike motion, imbuing it with poisoning magic. You infect the subject with a poison that saps willpower, dealing 1d10 points of Wisdom damage immediately and another 1d10 points of Wisdom damage 1 minute later. Each instance of damage can be negated by a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your Int or Cha modiﬁer, for wizards or sorcerers, respectively). Material Component: A piece of a toadstool.  141  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  MINDLESS RAGE  142  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes By waving a scarlet cloth and shouting taunts at your intended subject, you gain its undivided attention. You ﬁll the subject with so great a rage that it can do nothing but focus on engaging you in personal physical combat. The target must be able to see you when you cast this spell. If the subject later loses line of sight to you, the spell immediately ends. (A subject can’t voluntarily break line of sight with you, such as by closing its eyes, to end this spell prematurely.) If the subject threatens you, it must make a full attack against you using a melee weapon or a natural weapon. If the subject doesn’t threaten you at the start of its turn, it must move toward you (taking nothing but move actions) and end its movement as close to you as possible. If it gets close enough with a single move action to threaten you, it stops and makes a melee attack against you as normal. While under the effect of a mindless rage spell, the subject can make use of all its normal melee combat skills, abilities, and feats—either offensive or defensive. However, the subject can’t make ranged attacks, cast spells, or activate magic items that require a command word, a spell trigger, or spell completion to function. The subject can’t make any attack against a creature other than you. The subject of this spell, though overcome with rage, is by no means rendered idiotic or suicidal. For example, an affected creature will not charge off a cliff in an attempt to reach you. An interesting side effect of mindless rage occurs when the spell affects any character or creature that has the rage ability (such as a barbarian). In these cases, the mindless rage spell automatically activates the creature’s rage ability  (and counts as one of the creature’s uses of rage for that day). Focus: A scarlet handkerchief or similar piece of cloth, waved in the target’s direction while you vocalize the verbal component.  MINOR DISGUISE  Transmutation Level: Bard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour Yourﬁngertipsglowblue,andyouaddafew details to enhance your disguise. You use magic to make minor, cosmetic changes in your appearance. The spell does not change the actual structure of either your features or body. It can add color to hair, paint wrinkles upon your face, give you a scar, or darken your teeth. This spell gives you a +2 competence bonus on the next Disguise check you make during its duration.  MISER’S ENVY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Uponinvokingthepowerofthisspell,both thedwarfandthesmallidolacrosstheroom glow with a violet shade. The dwarf starts moving toward it, his eyes tinged violet with greed. When you cast this spell, you designate a target creature and specify an object, both of which must be within the spell’s range. If the target creature fails its saving throw, it becomes consumed by a powerful desire for the object. For the duration of the spell, the creature seeks to obtain the object (going so far as to attack anyone holding or wearing it). Once the creature gains possession of the object, it protects the item greed-  ily, attacking anyone who approaches within 30 feet or who otherwise appears to be trying to take the object away. If no one approaches within 30 feet or seems interested in trying to take the object, the subject can act normally. Dragons, due to their greedy nature, take a –4 penalty on their saving throws against this spell. Material Component: A copper piece.  MOMENT OF CLARITY Abjuration Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Youfeeladark,oppressiveweightpressing against your mind. When you touch your target, the weight lifts. The creature you touched seems now to be battling with a similar oppression. When you cast this spell and touch a creature that is under the inﬂuence of a mind-affecting spell or ability, that creature immediately receives another saving throw against the effect’s original DC to break free of the effect. If the spell or ability did not originally permit a saving throw, this spell has no effect.  MONSTROUS THRALL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Domination 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Calling upon your reserves of personal power, you reach outward with your mind and gain control of the will of your foe. This spell functions like true domination (page 224), except that the subject can be any creature and is permanently  Evocation Level: Moon 3 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A swordlike beam Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A 3-foot-long blazing beam of moonlight springs forth from your hand.  You call a swordlike beam of moonlight into your hand. Anyone who can cast moon blade can wield the beam with proﬁciency. However, if you are proﬁcient with any type of sword, you can wield the beam as if it were any type of sword and thus gain the beneﬁts of any special sword skill you might have, such as Weapon Focus. Attacks with a moon blade are melee touch attacks. Its strike saps vitality or life force, causing no visible wounds but dealing 1d8 points of damage +1 point per two caster levels (to a maximum of +10) to any type of creature except undead. Undead are visibly wounded by a moon blade. Their substance boils away from its touch, and they take 2d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (to a maximum of +20) per blow. The blade is immaterial, and your Strength modiﬁer does not apply to the damage. A successful moon blade strike temporarily scrambles magic. On the target’s next turn after a hit from a moon blade, the creature must make a Concentration check to use any spell or spell-like ability. The DC is equal to 10 + damage dealt + spell level. (An opponent hit by a moon blade while casting a spell must make the usual Concentration check to avoid losing the spell in addition to the check on its next turn.)  MOON BOLT  Evocation Level: Cleric 4, druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Target: One living or undead creature, or two living or undead creatures that are no more than 15 ft. apart; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half (living target) or Will negates (undead target) Spell Resistance: Yes Picturing a full moon in your mind you call upon the cyclical energies of the celestial body. You create a bolt of shimmering moonlight that streaks from your outstretched hand. A moon bolt strikes unerringly against any living or undead creature in range. A living creature struck by a moon bolt takes 1d4 points of Strength damage per three caster levels (maximum 5d4). If the subject makes a successful Fortitude saving throw, the Strength damage is halved. An undead creature struck by a moon bolt must make a Will save or fall helpless for 1d4 rounds, after which time it is no longer helpless and can stand upright, but it takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls and Will saving throws for the next minute.  MOON LUST  Illusion (Pattern) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Forcefully presenting a silver ingot in your hand, you extol the virtues of the moon’s beauty in a language both beautiful and dead.Thewordsofyourlovingdeclaration call forth a silver-white glow around your target that swiftly fades.  This spell instills in the target an obsessive fascination with the moon. If the target fails its save, it ﬁxates on the moon, staring at the moon or imagining it in its mind, and is considered fascinated for the duration of the spell. If the saving throw is successful, the subject is instead dazzled for the duration of the spell. Sightless creatures are not affected by this spell. Focus: A silver ingot worth 5 gp.  MOON PATH  Evocation [Force] Level: Moon 5 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A variable-width, glowing white stair or bridge of translucent force up to 15 ft./level long; see text Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  MOON BLADE  Arcane Material Component: A small candy made with wintergreen oil.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  dominated if it fails its initial Will save. A subject ordered to take an action against its nature receives a saving throw with a –4 penalty to resist taking that particular action. If the save succeeds, the subject still remains your thrall despite its minor mutiny. Once a subject makes a successful saving throw to resist a speciﬁc order, it makes all future saving throws to resist taking that speciﬁc action without a penalty.  Asyoucastthisspell,pure,palemoonlight shapes itself into a stair or bridge, as you desire. Moon path allows you to create a stair or bridge from one spot to another. The effect is a railless ribbon of glowing white translucent force like a glass strip. The strip can be from 3 to 20 feet wide as you decide. (You can vary the width over the ribbon’s length if you want.) It sticks to its endpoints unshakably, even if these endpoints are in midair. At the time of casting, you designate up to one creature per caster level to receive extra protection while standing on or moving along the moon path. Protected creatures gain the beneﬁt of a sanctuary effect. This functions like the 1st-level spell sanctuary except that the save DC is 15 + your Wis modiﬁer, and any subject of the spell who attacks breaks the sanctuary effect for all subjects. Protected creatures also stick to the top of the moon path as though they have received spider climb spells. A creature loses both beneﬁts immediately when it leaves the path. Unlike a wall of force, a moon path can be dispelled. It is otherwise similar to a wall of force in that it needs no supports and it is immune to damage of  143  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  all kinds. A disintegrate spell blasts a hole in the path 10 feet square, leaving the rest of the path intact. (If the moon path is 10 feet wide or less, this merely creates a 10-foot gap.) A hit from a rod of cancellation, a sphere of annihilation, or Mordenkainen’s disjunction destroys a moon path. Spells and breath weapons cannot pass through a moon path, although dimension door, teleport, and similar effects can bypass the barrier. It blocks ethereal creatures as well as material creatures. Gaze attacks cannot operate through a moon path. A moon path must be straight, continuous, and unbroken when formed. If its surface would be interrupted by any object or creature, the spell fails. The bridge version of the spell must be created ﬂat. The stair version cannot rise or descend any more sharply than 45 degrees. Arcane Material Component: A white handkerchief.  MOONBEAM  Evocation [Light] Level: Moon 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None or Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: No As you complete this spell, a swath of pale moonlight springs from your hand.  144  On your turn each round, you can change the direction the cone of light points. Light from a moonbeam spell does not adversely affect creatures that are sensitive to light, but lycanthropes in humanoid form caught in the cone must make a Will save to avoid involuntarily assuming their animal forms. A lycanthrope in animal form can change out of it on the creature’s next turn (spending a round in animal form). However, if it is still in the area of the spell, it must succeed on a Will save to do so. Once a lycanthrope successfully saves against moonbeam, it is not affected by any more of your moonbeam spells for 24 hours. Moonbeam penetrates any darkness spell of equal or lower level, but does  not counter or dispel it. Darkness spells of higher level block a moonbeam. Arcane Material Component: A pinch of white powder.  MOONBOW  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 1d4 motes of electricity Duration: Instantaneous or up to 4 rounds; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Sparks ﬂit among your ﬁngers as you call electricity from the surrounding air. This spell conjures three glowing motes of electricity. You direct any number of the motes to ﬂy off and strike targets within the spell’s range. Multiple motes can be ﬁred at the same target, or each can be sent against a separate target. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with a mote to strike a target. Any creature struck by a mote takes 1d6 points of electricity damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6). If you do not immediately ﬁre all the motes created by the spell, you can choose to ﬁre as many of the remaining ones as you wish as a standard action during the next round. If a round passes in which you do not ﬁre one of your motes, the spell ends and all remaining motes vanish. Material Component: A small piece of moonstone.  MOONFIRE  Evocation [Light] Level: Moon 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst and coneshaped emanation; see text Duration: Instantaneous and 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex half and Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes A cone of ﬁery white moonlight springs from your hand.  Living creatures in the area of a moonﬁre spell feel an unnatural chill and take 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d8). Undead and shapechangers take 1d8 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d8). This application of the spell allows a Reﬂex save for half damage. All magical auras within the cone glow with a faint blue light for 1 round per caster level. Disguised, shapechanged, or polymorphed creatures and objects in the spell’s area at the time the spell is cast must make Will saves or immediately return to their normal forms. Even if the save succeeds, they remain covered in ghostly white outlines that show their true forms for 1 round per caster level. The entire area covered by the cone glows silver-white for 1 round per caster level. This radiance is as bright as the light of a full moon and negates electricity damage for 1 round per caster level unless the item or creature generating the electricity effect makes a caster level check (1d20 + item’s caster level or creature’s caster level) against a DC equal to 10 + your caster level. If an electricity effect is generated outside the glowing cone, the cone blocks the electricity effect unless the creature generating the effect succeeds on a caster level check. If an electricity effect is generated inside the glowing cone, the cone negates the electricity effect unless the creature generating the effect succeeds on a caster level check.  MOUNTAIN STANCE  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No By calling upon the primordial powers of elemental earth, you complete the spell. A feelingofstubborndeterminationﬁllsyour soul until you touch the spell’s intended recipient. You see then in that creature a hint of the same feeling of determination. While this spell is in effect, the subject can root itself to the ground as a free  action. The subject gains a bonus equal to your caster level against any attempts to grapple, lift, push, bull rush, overrun, throw, trip, or otherwise force the subject to move against its will through either physical or magical means.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  If at any point such an effort succeeds and the subject is forced to move, the spell ends immediately. Any voluntary movement on the subject’s part does not end the spell (although a creature cannot be rooted while it moves), and the subject can “reroot” itself elsewhere in the same manner as described above.  MURDEROUS MIST  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Cloud spreads in a 30-ft. radius, 20 ft. high Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No Drawing the power of steaming volcanic ventsintoyourbody,youexhale,andacloud of boiling steam roils away from you.  You create a cloud of scalding hot steam that moves in a straight line, away from you, at a speed of 10 feet per round. Anyone within the cloud takes 2d6 points of damage and is permanently blinded. If a creature within the area makes a successful Reﬂex saving throw, it takes only half damage and is not blinded. Any creature within the cloud has concealment. Winds do not affect the cloud’s direction or speed. However, a moderate wind (11+ mph) disperses the cloud in 4 rounds, and a strong wind (21+ mph) disperses it in 1 round.  NATURE’S AVATAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Mountain stance makes holding your ground easy  With a touch, you gift your animal ally with nature’s strength, resilience, and speed. The affected animal gains a +10 morale bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls and 1d8 temporary hit points per caster level, plus the effect of a haste spell (PH 239).  NATURE’S BALANCE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Touching your friend, you concentrate, imagining a light ﬂowing from your body intohis.Asyoudoso,ablueglowﬂickersto life in the center of your chest, and it travels  145  downyourarmintohisform,grantinghim a portion of your power.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You take a –4 penalty to your choice of Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution, and your subject gains an equivalent bonus to the same ability score. You get no saving throw to avoid the loss, but your subject can attempt a Fortitude save to avoid the gain, if desired.  NATURE’S FAVOR  Evocation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 minute Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Rubbingtheanimal’sside,youwhisperthe ﬁnal bit of the spell’s ritual. The animal glances at you before turning its attention to your foes, bristling as it does so. You grant the subject animal a +1 luck bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls for every three caster levels you possess (maximum +5).  NATURE’S RAMPART  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Structure up to 40 ft. square Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a ﬁnal wave of your hand, the ground beneath your feet trembles and the landscape shifts into a new form. You shape a natural setting into a formidable defensive position. Usually this spell is used to prepare an open outdoor area such as a hillside or a forest, but a large natural cavern could be shaped into a divine rampart. Artiﬁcial structures or features are not affected, although nature’s rampart could be positioned to ﬁll a gap between two buildings or barricade an unpaved road. The effect of the spell depends on the terrain:  146  Open Outdoor Site: A rampart or dike of earth 5 feet high and 5 feet thick at its base rises immediately behind a shallow ditch 5 feet wide and 5 feet deep along the perimeter of the site. Creatures behind the dike receive cover. Attackers approaching on foot must scramble down into the ditch and then climbing 10 feet to reach the top of the dike (Climb DC 10). Rough Outdoor Site or Cavern: Loose stones and boulders, dead wood, and patches of dense briars are arranged to form a defensible wall 5 feet high and 2 feet thick at the base around the perimeter of the site. Creatures behind the wall receive cover. Marshy or Low-Lying Site: In areas such as marsh, bog, swamp, or tundra, nature’s rampart cannot raise a wall, but instead creates a water-ﬁlled ditch 10 feet wide and 5 feet deep. Creatures forced to wade the ditch are reduced to 1/4 their normal speed (minimum 5 feet) and cannot charge or run. Focus: A small quartz gem engraved with the image of an exquisite tiny castle, worth at least 100 gp.  NATUREWATCH  Necromancy Level: Druid 0, ranger 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Reaching out with your heart, you seek knowledge of the health of plants and animals in the area. This spell is similar to deathwatch (PH 217), but it functions only on animals and plants. In addition, it also allows you to determine a variety of other mundane information about the animals and plants (whether or not the plants are dehydrated, the animals are malnourished, and so forth).  NAUSEATING BREATH Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft.  Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No Youwindmillyourarmtocompletethespell andnearlygagbeforeexhalingagreatgout of putrid-smelling green gas. You breathe out a cone of nauseating vapors. Any creature in the area must succeed on a Fortitude save or be nauseated for 1d6 rounds. Material Component: A piece of ﬁsh at least one day old.  NEGATIVE ENERGY AURA  Necromancy Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Youspeaktheancientwordsofthisspelland anauraofblack,cracklingnegativeenergy surrounds you. Each round on your turn, every living creature within 10 feet of you loses 1 hit point per three caster levels (maximum 5). Undead creatures instead gain 2 hit points per round (though they can’t exceed their full normal hit point total from this effect). Characters with immunity to negative energy effects are not affected by this aura. The aura does not affect you.  NERVESKITTER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes You suffuse your ally with a brief, blue glow. He jerks away from you, as if he can anticipate your next action. You cast this spell when you and your party roll for initiative. You enhance  the subject’s reactions in combat, granting it a +5 bonus on its initiative check for the current encounter. If the subject does not make an initiative check within 1 round, this spell has no effect.  NET OF SHADOWS  NIGHTMARE LULLABY  Yourmusiccalmsyourfoe,sendingittosleep whileitremainsupright.Asyouperform,it starts to twitch and moan, as if tormented by unseen fears.  This spell gives the subjects concealment, but the shifting magic shadows also inhibit the subjects’ ability to ascer-  This spell can put a target into a surreal, sleepwalking state. The target must make a Will saving throw or become  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Atouchfromyourhand,whichshedsdarknessliketheblackestnight,disruptsthelife force of a living creature. Your touch deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) and 1d6+2 points of Constitution damage. (A successful Fortitude saving throw negates the Constitution damage.) The spell has a special effect on an undead creature. An undead touched  The nauseating breath spell can effectively incapacitate foes  Illus. by R. Horsley  You cast the spell, and the surrounding shadows shift at your command, ﬂying toward your targets and wrapping themselves around them.  NIGHT’S CARESS  CHAPTER 1  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  confused, thinking it has entered a nightmare.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Illusion (Shadow) [Darkness] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 25 ft. apart Duration: 1d6 rounds Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  tain their surroundings. The subjects can see only 5 feet through the shadows that coat them, and foes within that range have concealment from the subjects. Darkvision does not penetrate a net of shadows.  147  by you takes no damage or Constitution loss, but it must make a successful Will saving throw or ﬂee as if panicked for 1d4 rounds +1 round per caster level.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  NIGHTSHIELD  Abjuration Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) With a whisper-quiet whoosh, a ﬁeld of shadowy energy cloaks your body. This spell provides a +1 resistance bonus on saving throws; this resistance bonus increases to +2 at caster level 6th and +3 at caster level 9th. In addition, the spell negates magic missile attacks directed at you.  NIGHTSTALKER’S TRANSFORMATION  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Moving the potion you hold in a circle beforeyou,youﬁnishspeakingthewordsof the spell before quafﬁng the potion in one gulp. A moment later you feel discomfort as your connection to the arcane energies of the world around you slips away. In its place, you ﬁnd your mind and body ﬁlled with abilities you lacked before. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +3 luck bonus to Armor Class, a +5 luck bonus on Reﬂex saving throws, a +5 competence bonus on Spot, Listen, Hide, and Move Silently checks, and proﬁciency with all simple weapons plus the hand crossbow, rapier, sap, shortbow, and short sword. You also gain the Weapon Finesse feat and the evasion ability (PH 50). You deal an extra 3d6 points of damage whenever you attack an opponent that you ﬂank or an opponent denied its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class. This extra damage works like the rogue’s sneak attack ability.  148  You lose your spellcasting ability for the duration of the spell, including your ability to use spell trigger or spell completion magic items, just as if the spells were no longer on your class list. Material Component: A potion of cat’s grace, which you drink (and whose effect is subsumed by this spell’s effect).  NIMBUS OF LIGHT  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 1, Puriﬁcation 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level or until discharged (D) A glittering corona of sunlight surrounds your body at a few inches distance—until you release it as a focused blast of divine energy. The nimbus of light around you glows like a lantern, providing bright illumination in a 30-foot radius (and shadowy illumination for an additional 30 feet) from you. As a move action, you can coalesce the energy from a nimbus of light around your outstretched arm, and then as a standard action ﬂing it toward a foe within 30 feet. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the energy to strike a target. A nimbus of light deals 1d8 points of damage +1 point per round that has elapsed since you cast the spell (maximum 1d8 + caster level). Attacking with a nimbus of light ends the spell, whether your ranged touch attack is successful or not.  NIXIE’S GRACE  Transmutation [Water] Level: Bard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You feel a longing for cool waters, and a forcefulconﬁdencemanifestswithinyou. Your movements and thoughts become ﬁlled with grace.  This potent spell infuses you with powerful fey magic, granting you many of the traits and abilities of a nixie (MM 235). Upon casting this spell, you gain a swim speed of 30 feet. You can breathe underwater, and you gain low-light vision and damage reduction 5/cold iron. You also gain a +6 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +2 enhancement bonus to Wisdom, and a +8 enhancement bonus to Charisma. Focus: A lock of nixie’s hair, freely given to you by a nixie.  OBEDIENT AVALANCHE Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Cold 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 20-ft.-radius avalanche of snow centered on a point in space; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half or Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  You summon an avalanche of snow out of a rift in midair, burying your foes and sending them to a frosty death. An obedient avalanche spell affects creatures differently, depending on where they are in relation to the avalanche. Within 20 feet of the Center Point: Creatures take 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d8) and an additional 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels. A successful Reﬂex save halves the damage. Creatures who fail their saves are also buried (DMG 90). All squares within 20 feet of the center point are covered in heavy snow (DMG 94), which persists as long as ordinary snow would. A buried creature can free itself with a DC 20 Strength check as a full-round action, and can be dug free by others (a single creature working alone requires 1 minute to free a trapped creature). A trapped creature is unable to move, and cannot cast spells with somatic components, and any material components must be in hand. Between 20 feet and 40 feet of the Center Point: Creatures take half as much damage from the impact of the avalanche as the creatures nearer the  Divination Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, Liberation 1, ranger 1 Components: V, F Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous A brief supplication gives you a vision that hints at how dangerous the immediate future is likely to be. Based on an assessment of your immediate surroundings and chosen path of travel, you receive one of three visions that reﬂect the next hour’s journey: safety, peril, or great danger. The base chance for receiving an accurate reply is 70% +1% per caster level, to a maximum of 90%; the DM makes the roll secretly. If the omen of peril is successful, you get one of three visions, which lasts just a second or two. • Safety: You aren’t in any immediate danger. If you continue on your present course (or remain where you are if you have been stationary for some time before casting the spell), you will face no signiﬁcant monsters, traps, or other challenges for the next hour or so.  If the roll fails, you get one of the two incorrect results, determined randomly by the DM, and you don’t necessarily know that you failed because the DM rolls secretly. Choosing which vision is “correct” takes some educated guesswork on the part of the DM, who should assess the characters’ likely courses of action and what dangers they’re likely to face. The exact form that an omen of peril takes depends on whether you worship a speciﬁc deity, venerate nature as a druid, or simply uphold abstract principles. A druid might see a white dove for safety, a dark cloud obscuring the sun for peril, and a forest ﬁre for great danger. A cleric of Fharlanghn might get a vision of a straight road for safety, a crossroads for peril, and a washed-out bridge for great danger. Unlike the more powerful augury spell (PH 202), an omen of peril doesn’t respond to a speciﬁc question. It indicates only the level of danger likely for the next hour, not what form the danger will take. Focus: A set of marked sticks, bones, or similar tokens worth at least 25 gp.  ONE WITH THE LAND Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  You cast the spell and are bathed in a golden-greenlightfromabove.Asitfades, you feel in touch with your natural surroundings.  Move Silently, Search, Survival, and wild empathy checks.  ONE MIND  Divination Level: Paladin 2 This spell functions like lesser one mind, except as noted here, and in addition it allows you and your special mount to predict each other’s movements, giving you a signiﬁcant edge in combat. You and your mount both gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls as long as you are mounted.  CHAPTER 1  OMEN OF PERIL  • Peril: You will face challenges typical of an adventure: challenging but not overwhelming monsters, dangerous traps, and other hazards for the next hour or so. • Great Danger: Your very life is at grave risk. You will likely face powerful NPCs or deadly traps in the next hour.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  center point took (Reﬂex negates). Creatures who fail their saves must also resist the force of the snow moving past them as if they were being bull rushed. The snow has a +13 attack bonus (+5 for effective Strength of 20 and +8 for effectively being Huge) on the bull rush check, and it pushes characters away from the center point of the spell. All squares in the 20-foot to 40-foot ring are covered in snow (DMG 94), which persists as long as ordinary snow would. Terrain and Structures: The avalanche uproots small trees and other vegetation automatically, and it leaves a trail of light rubble (DMG 91) even after the snow melts. Structures struck by an obedient avalanche take 1d6×10 points of damage. An obedient avalanche extinguishes all ﬂames it touches, whether they are normal or magical.  ONE MIND, GREATER Divination Level: Paladin 3  This spell functions like one mind, except as noted here, and in addition you and your mount gain a +2 bonus on melee damage rolls as long as you are mounted.  ONE MIND, LESSER  Divination Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level Your mount begins to move in a predictable, complementary manner to yourself. It positions itself to maximize its effectiveness as a combat partner, and you feel that your actions instinctively do the same for it. You temporarily strengthen the mental bond with your special mount when you cast this spell. When you are mounted on your special mount, the link with your mount sharpens your senses, giving you a +4 insight bonus on Spot and Listen checks and the scent ability (MM 314) for the duration of the spell. If your mount ever moves more than 10 feet from you, the spell ends.  You forge a strong link with nature that gives you greater insight into your environment. You gain a +2 competence bonus on Handle Animal, Hide,  149  OOZE PUPPET  With a few chanted words and a mystic pass of your arm, your magic reaches out to invisibly surround the ooze, placing it under your control. You telekinetically take control of the targeted ooze, manipulating it and forcing  Illus. by C. Dien  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One ooze Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  it to move and attack as you see ﬁt. You can force the ooze to perform as you desire, within the limits of its abilities. Controlling the ooze’s actions for an entire round is a move action for you. When the ooze is not directed to move, attack, or undertake any actions by you, telekinetic force holds it immobile. Once control is established, you must have line of sight to the ooze to manipulate it, but distance is not otherwise a factor, unless you and the ooze are on different planes (at which point the spell ends). If a controlled ooze splits, such as a black pudding (MM 201) struck by a slashing weapon, you retain control of only one of the resultant oozes (choose randomly).  OPALESCENT GLARE  Necromancy [Death, Good] Level: Arborea 4, Cleric 6, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youinvokethespellandyoureyesbeginto glow with a rippling pearly radiance, like those of a noble ghaele eladrin. Inspired by the deadly gaze of the noble ghaele eladrin, you gain a gaze attack usable against creatures within 60 feet. If an evil creature with 5 or fewer Hit Dice meets your gaze (DMG 294), it dies unless it succeeds on a Will save. Even if the save succeeds, the creature is affected as though by a fear spell (PH 229) for 2d10 rounds. Non-evil creatures and evil creatures with more than 5 Hit Dice are not slain by the gaze, and they suffer the fear effect only if they fail the Will save.  ORB OF ACID  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One orb of acid Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: No An orb of acid about 3 inches across shoots from your palm at its target, dealing 1d6 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 15d6). You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit your target. A creature struck by the orb takes damage and becomes sickened by the acid’s noxious fumes for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save negates the sickened effect but does not reduce the damage.  ORB OF ACID, LESSER  150  The ooze puppet spell telekinetically controls an ooze creature  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One orb of acid Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Yourquick,precisemovementsculminatein youropenpalmfacingyourtarget.Anorbof dark green acid ﬂies from your hand.  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of cold This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals cold damage. In addition, a creature struck by an orb of cold must make a Fortitude save or be blinded for 1 round instead of being sickened.  ORB OF COLD, LESSER Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of cold  Your hand takes on a blue tint and your ﬁngersturnnumbandunresponsiveasyou completethespell.Fromyourchilledpalm ﬂies an orb composed of blue ice. This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals cold damage.  ORB OF ELECTRICITY  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of electricity This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals electricity damage. In addition, a creature wearing metal armor struck by an orb of electricity must make a Fortitude save or be entangled for 1 round instead of being sickened.  The air crackles around your outstretched hand and the smell of ozone assaults your nostrils as a ball of electrical energy, its surface crackling with bolts of lightning, streaks from your open palm. This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals electricity damage.  ORB OF FIRE  Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of ﬁre This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals ﬁre damage. In addition, a creature struck by an orb of ﬁre must make a Fortitude save or be dazed for 1 round instead of being sickened.  ORB OF FIRE, LESSER Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of ﬁre  Your hand heats to an uncomfortable temperaturejustmomentsbeforeyourelease the spell’s energy in the form of an orb of whiteﬂamesspeedingfromyouroutwardfacing palm. This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals ﬁre damage.  ORB OF FORCE  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One orb of force Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you gather the energies of the spell, you feel against your palm a spherical weight that seems almost bonded to your skin. Thespheregrows,untilwithaﬁnalprecise movement, you release the translucent  You create a globe of force 3 inches across, which streaks from your palm toward your target. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit the target. The orb deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d6).  ORB OF SOUND  Conjuration (Creation) [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of sonic energy Symbolsrecognizableasmusicalnotation— thevisualrepresentationofsound—appear in midair within the curve of your palm accompanied by the fractious sounds they represent. The notes begin to whirl and stretch,formingintoasphericalwhirlwind of cacophonic chaos, as you make ready to releasethespell.Atlast,yousendthesphere of noise toward your chosen target.  CHAPTER 1  ORB OF COLD  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of electricity  blue orb, sending it hurtling toward your intended target.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  An orb of acid about 2 inches across shoots from your palm at its target, dealing 1d8 points of acid damage. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit your target. For every two caster levels beyond 1st, your orb deals an additional 1d8 points of damage: 2d8 at 3rd level, 3d8 at 5th level, 4d8 at 7th level, and the maximum of 5d8 at 9th level or higher.  ORB OF ELECTRICITY, LESSER  This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals 1d4 points of sonic damage per level (maximum 15d4). In addition, a creature struck by an orb of sound must make a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1 round instead of being sickened.  ORB OF SOUND, LESSER Conjuration (Creation) [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of sonic energy  This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals 1d6 points of sonic damage, plus an additional 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels beyond 1st: 2d6 at 3rd level, 3d6 at 5th level, 4d6 at 7th level, and the maximum of 5d6 at 9th level or higher.  OTYUGH SWARM  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Pestilence 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Three or more otyughs, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Seven days or seven months (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  151  Illus. by J. Engle  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You smell an otyugh swarm before you see it  Focusing your will on a disgusting pile of refuse, you cause toothed and tentacled horrors to rise up and stalk about at your command. Otyugh swarm creates otyughs from a large collection of refuse and ﬁlth, such as a sewer or cesspool. You can choose to create 3d4 ordinary otyughs (MM 204) or 1d3+1 Huge otyughs with 15 HD (MM 292). The otyughs willingly aid you in combat or battle, perform a speciﬁc mission, or serve as bodyguards. They remain with you for seven days unless you dismiss them. If the otyughs are created only for guard duty, the duration of the spell is seven months. In this case, the otyughs must be ordered to guard only a speciﬁc site or location. Otyughs summoned to guard duty cannot move outside the spell’s range. You must create the otyughs in an area containing at least 6,000 pounds of sewage, refuse, or offal. After you cast the spell, otyughs not summoned for guard duty can leave the area of offal at your command.  152  OWL’S INSIGHT  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) As you cast this spell, your face is overlaid with the image of a snow owl. The image fades as you bestow your ally with comprehension. The subject gains an insight bonus to Wisdom equal to 1/2 your caster level.  PANACEA  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 4, druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched  Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You kneel next to your afﬂicted comrade and speak the soft words of this spell. At your touch a golden radiance infuses your companion. This spell channels positive energy into a creature to wipe away its afﬂictions. It immediately ends any of the following conditions affecting the subject: blinded, confused, dazed, dazzled, deafened, diseased, exhausted, fatigued, frightened, nauseated, panicked, paralyzed, shaken, sickened, and stunned. It negates sleep effects and the effect of the feeblemind spell, and ends any additional effects from poison, as the neutralize poison spell. It also cures 1d8 points of damage + 1 point per caster level (maximum +20). Panacea does not remove ability damage, negative levels, or drained levels. Used against an undead creature, panacea deals damage instead of curing the creature (which takes half damage  if it makes a Will saving throw), but it has no other effect.  PAVILION OF GRANDEUR  PERINARCH  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, Limbo 4, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)  This spell grants temporary control over the terrain of Limbo. Normally, unless controlled, the Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo (DMG 158) is just what the plane’s name implies: a roiling soup of energy and elements. Natives learn to control it or to inhabit areas that have enjoyed some measure of control for a long period, but visitors to areas of “raw” limbo must make a DC 16 Wisdom check to gain control over the dangerous roil. The perinarch spell gives you automatic control of a radius of raw Limbo (an area not already stabilized or within some other creature’s control) in close range. Control allows you to reshape the raw limbo as you desire,  A pavilion of grandeur spell provides adventurers with a spectacular resting place between battles  Illus. by B. Hagan  You conjure up a grand pavilion-sized tent that has a single entrance on the plane from which the spell was cast. The entry point looks like a faint shimmering in the air that is 10 feet wide by 15 feet high. Only those you  Limbo impinges on all sides—colors, sounds,andelements.Youspeakthewords and feel the power of the plane buckle withinyourmind,thenrelaxasyouimpress order upon the chaos.  CHAPTER 1  Thinking sweet thoughts of home and hearth, you conjure an invisible bastion of comfort and security.  Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: None (object) and Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Creation 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Extradimensional pavilion, up to ﬁve 10-ft. cubes/level (S), plus feast for 12 creatures/level Duration: 24 hours/level (D) plus 12 hours; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  designate can enter the pavilion, and the entrance is shut and made invisible behind you when you enter. You can open it again from your own side at will. Once observers have passed beyond the entrance, they are in a spacious tent decorated in the colors of your faith. The lighting can vary between darkness and daylight, and the temperature between 40 and 90 degrees Fahrenheit, at your discretion when casting the spell. The pavilion is sumptuously furnished, including a full meal for a dozen creatures per caster level. Anyone who spends 1 hour dining here gains beneﬁts identical to those of a heroes’ feast spell (PH 240). While in the pavilion, creatures heal naturally at double the normal rate (not including fast healing or regeneration).  153  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  adding or subtracting one of the four basic elements once per round as a standard action. A favorite among travelers from the Material Plane is a chunk of earth surrounded by a small atmosphere of air. The effect of this spell overlaps with the control already (potentially) established with a Wisdom check. Your allies can give their control over to you concurrently with the spell being cast, if they so choose. Control cannot be wrested away from you while the spell is in effect (which is one of the best reasons to cast this spell, even if you have a high Wisdom). If you move more than 100 feet away from the area that you controlled, the order you imposed fades away. You are unable to achieve any works of complexity within an area you control, but you can mix two or three elements in a crude fashion; a few examples are provided below. You can attempt to seize control of a new area that already contains foes; however, foes can make a Reﬂex save to get out of the area. Thick Barrier: You can “thicken” empty air with dust and rock, creating a zone around yourself and your allies that outside creatures must hack or force a way through. Their speed drops to 5 feet, or 10 feet for Large or larger creatures. Fiery Barrier: You can create a thick ﬁeld of ﬂame that deals 3d10 points of ﬁre damage to any creature attempting to pass through it. The ﬁeld also deals 3d10 points of ﬁre damage for each round a creature lingers within it. Complete Barrier: You can create a complete barrier of solid stone up to 1 foot thick encircling yourself and your allies, preventing access by any other than the most accomplished tunnelers. On the other hand, you can attempt to trap foes within their own bubble of solid stone.  PERINARCH, PLANAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 9, Limbo 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9  154  The god’s domain was made entirely of water, but your spell creates a bubble of air and a place to stand. This spell functions like perinarch, except that you can cast this spell on any highly morphic or divinely morphic plane (DMG 148).  (for sorcerers and wizards, respectively) and deals 1d4 points of damage, with a critical threat range of 19–20. If an ally also attacks the creature, the blade moves on your turn to ﬂank the target. As a force effect, it can strike ethereal and incorporeal creatures. The blade cannot be attacked. Each round after the ﬁrst, you can use a standard action to switch the blade to a new target; otherwise, it continues to attack the same target. If an attacked creature has spell resistance, the resistance is checked the ﬁrst time the persistent blade strikes. If the blade is successfully resisted, the spell is dispelled. If not, the blade has its normal full effect on that creature for the duration of the spell. Focus: A silvered dagger.  PHANTASMAL ASSAILANTS  Although only in the mind of the spell’s target, phantasmal assailants inﬂict very real harm to the weak-willed  PERSISTENT BLADE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One dagger made of force Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdadaggerinyourhandandconcentrate on it, evoking the power of the spell. A duplicateofthedagger,madeoftranslucent force,appearsbesidesitandﬂiesoffatyour command. You bring into being a tiny blade of force. The blade ﬂies at a speed of 40 feet (perfect) and attacks any target within its range, as you desire, starting in the round when you cast the spell. The blade attacks on your turn once each round, striking with an attack bonus equal to your base attack bonus + 1/2 your Cha modiﬁer or Int modiﬁer  Illusion (Phantasm) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with), then Fortitude half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youpointatyourintendedtarget.Instantly, shadowy shapes form at your ﬂank and rush toward the creature you indicate, surroundingit.Othersnearbydonotnoticethe images that plague your target. You create phantasmal images of nightmare creatures in the target’s mind, visible only as shadowy shapes to you and unseen by all others. If the target succeeds on an initial Will save, it recognizes that the images are not real, and the spell fails. If not, the phantasms strike the target, dealing 8 points of Wisdom damage and 8 points of Dexterity damage (4 points each on a successful Fortitude save). If the subject of a phantasmal assailant succeeds in disbelieving and is wearing a helm of  telepathy, the spell can be turned back upon you with the same effect.  PHANTASMAL DECOY  You create a phantasmal image of the subject’s most hated enemy by sifting through the subconscious mind of the subject. Only you and the spell’s subject can see the phantasmal creature, and the phantasm seems blurry and indistinct to you. If the target fails its Will saving throw, you designate a space that the phantasm appears to occupy. The subject must attack the phantasm, or move to be adjacent to it. A creature that attacks the phantasm is allowed an additional saving throw to disbelieve the illusion. If moving up to the phantasm would cause the subject to cross dangerous terrain (such as a pool of lava), it does not move to be adjacent to the phantasm. It merely moves as close as it can and takes no further actions unless the phantasm moves to a space it can reach. As a move action, you can move a phantasmal decoy up to 60 feet in any direction. Because it’s not real, a phantasmal decoy isn’t affected by terrain that slows movement (although you can slow its progress voluntarily if you like to help maintain the facade of realism).  PHANTASMAL DISORIENTATION  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  PHANTASMAL THIEF  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Greed 8, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One invisible, mindless, shapeless thief Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Asyouinvokethisspell,thespoolbeginsto spin, the thread vanishing as it unravels. There is a wrinkle of force that ﬂashes brieﬂy; then it evaporates, leaving only the promise of power behind. An invisible force, not unlike the product of an unseen servant spell (PH 297), comes into being where you wish. On your turn, this force steals objects from others as you inaudibly direct it (a free action). A phantasmal thief can steal an object from a creature or can pick up an unattended object, as long as the  CHAPTER 1  Reaching into your foe’s mind, you weave an illusion of his most hated foe.  The target of a phantasmal disorientation spell must make a Will save after this spell is cast to discern true landmarks from phantasmal ones. If the save succeeds, the creature moves and acts normally. If the save fails, it instead moves in a direction 90 degrees to either side (equal chance of going left or right), and cannot target any creature with ranged attacks or ranged spells. Because of the disorientation, the subject doesn’t realize it’s headed in the wrong direction until it meaningfully interacts with its environment (by making an attack or manipulating an object such as a door, for example). For the duration of the spell, an affected creature must succeed on a Will save each round to move normally. A phantasmal disorientation spell affects only the direction of movement and attacks made at range. Creatures subject to it can still make melee attacks, cast personal or touch spells, or otherwise act normally.  object weighs no more than 1 pound per caster level. It cannot break into locked chests. A phantasmal thief has a Hide modiﬁer (useful against those who can see invisible creatures) and a Move Silently modiﬁer both equal to your caster level. If a phantasmal thief goes undetected, it can steal any object a creature possesses but is not holding or wearing. Even objects in a bag of holding can be stolen. It can steal objects, bring objects to you, or put them back where they came from. It can take no other actions. A phantasmal thief needs 1 round to steal an object and another round to bring it to you. A phantasmal thief can hold only one object at a time, and the object becomes invisible in its grasp. A thief cannot take an item if it is detected by the creature it’s trying to steal from (with a Listen or Spot check). However, the thief can repeat the attempt in the next round. It cannot be harmed in any way, although it can be dispelled. A phantasmal thief can steal an object from a creature’s hand by making a successful disarm attempt. It does so with a bonus on the disarm check equal to your caster level. If a phantasmal thief is used in this way, it disappears after it brings the stolen object to you. Material Component: A spool of green thread.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates, and Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: Yes  Youcreateever-shiftingphantasmalterrain and landmarks that confuse the subject when it tries to move. The very ground shifts and twists beneath the subject’s feet, andthelandscapemovesofitsownaccord. The subject ﬁnds it nearly impossible to walk in a straight line.  PHANTOM BEAR  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One summoned phantom bear Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The ghostly image of a great bear appears before you. It rises silently on its hind legs and violently falls onto its forepaws, still making no sound. Then it opens its mouth, releasing a tremendous roar. This spell functions like phantom wolf (page 157), except that you conjure an incorporeal bear with a fearsome roar.  155  Phantom Bear  CR 14  N Huge magical beast (incorporeal) Init +9; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Listen +20, Spot +20  Illus. by E. Polak  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  AC 25, touch 25, flat-footed 16; Dodge, Mobility hp 147 (14 HD) Fort +13, Ref +17, Will +7  156  Speed fly 60 ft. (good) Melee 2 claws +23 incorporeal touch (2d6 plus 3d6 cold) and bite +22 incorporeal touch (2d8 plus 3d6 cold) Space 15 ft.; Reach 15 ft. Base Atk +14; Grp — Atk Options Combat Reflexes Special Actions fearsome roar Abilities Str —, Dex 29, Con 20, Int 11, Wis 17, Cha 28 SQ incorporeal traits Feats Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility, Multiattack, Weapon Focus (bite) Skills Listen +20, Spot +20 Fearsome Roar (Su) 120-ft. radius, once every 1d4 rounds, Will DC 26 negates. Creatures within 30 feet become panicked, others within the area become frightened for 3d6 rounds if they fail their saves.  PHANTOM FOE  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Assassin 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief Spell Resistance: No By waving around a tiny pewter ﬁgurine and picturing in your mind the ﬁgurine attackingthetargetcreature,youcomplete the spell. You feel a phantasmal force leap from the ﬁgurine toward your target. If the target creature fails its saving throw, this spell creates in the subject’s mind an illusory double of whichever creature currently threatens it that it deems most dangerous. The form of this phantom foe changes as appropriate whenever the target perceives a different threatening creature more dangerous than the last. This illusory double provides two effects.  First, the subject believes it is being ﬂanked by the phantom foe and the real creature the foe duplicates. Thus, the duplicated creature is always considered to be ﬂanking the subject in melee. A creature that can’t be ﬂanked is immune to this aspect of the spell. Second, the subject of the spell is unable to determine that the phantom foe is not a real threat, and whenever the subject attempts to attack the creature duplicated by the phantom foe, that creature beneﬁts from a 50% miss chance against attacks from the subject of the spell. Because this miss chance comes from the subject’s inability to tell the phantom foe from the original, it is rolled separately from any miss chance that applies due to displacement or concealment. Creatures other than the subject cannot see the phantom foe, although they can attempt to guess its location by how the target acts. If the subject is not threatened by any creature at the start of its turn, the spell ends. Focus: A tiny pewter ﬁgure of a warrior that is worth 10 gp.  The phantom stag spell provides a druid with a powerful mount to ride into battle  PHANTOM STAG  You conjure a Large, corporeal staglike creature that bears you or a person you designate into combat or overland at great speed. A phantom stag has a black body and head with sharp, silvery antlers, and smoke-colored, insubstantial hooves that make no sound. It has no saddle, bridle, or bit, but it is exceptionally alert to the nudges and balance changes of its rider. The phantom stag has an AC of 20 (–1 size, +6 natural armor, +5 Dex) and 40 hit points +5 hit points per caster level. It attacks with its antlers at a +10 bonus, dealing 1d8+9 points of damage (doubled on a successful charge). It can also trample Medium or smaller foes, who must succeed on a Reﬂex save (18 + 1/2 your caster level) or take 1d6+9 points of damage as the stag moves through their space. A phantom stag has a speed of 20 feet per caster level, to a maximum of 300 feet. It can bear its rider’s weight plus up to 10 pounds per caster level in other gear. It ignores terrain elements such as undergrowth, rubble, or mud that would slow its movement. Phantom stags gain certain powers according to caster level. A mount’s abilities include those associated with any lower caster levels. 12th Level: The phantom stag can use air walk at will (as the spell, PH 196, no action required to activate this ability) for up to 1 round at a time, after which it falls to the ground. The phantom stag gains a +2 deﬂection bonus to AC. 14th Level: The phantom stag can ﬂy at its speed (average maneuverability). The phantom stag gains a +4 deﬂection bonus to AC.  PHANTOM THREAT  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Reachingouttoyourfoe’smind,youcause him to feel as though a threat looms close behind no matter which way he turns. You create the sensation in the subject’s mind that it is threatened by more foes than it actually faces. Though the subject doesn’t actually perceive any additional enemies (and thus doesn’t waste any attacks on the phantasm), a creature affected by this spell is considered ﬂanked, even if not threatened by other creatures. No amount of convincing by others can help the subject of this spell avoid its effect—only a successful saving throw against the spell when initially cast can help the target. A creature that can’t be ﬂanked is immune to this spell.  PHANTOM WOLF  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One summoned phantom wolf Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Cupping a hand to your mouth, you howl likeawolf,andinamoment,mistcoalesces into a wolﬂike form with terrible jaws.  CR 12  N Large magical beast (incorporeal) Init +9; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Listen +20, Spot +20 Aura frightful presence AC 25, touch 25, flat-footed 16; Dodge, Mobility hp 113 (12 HD) Fort +12, Ref +17, Will +7 Speed fly 60 ft. (good) Melee bite +22 incorporeal touch (2d6 plus 3d6 cold) Space 15 ft.; Reach 15 ft. Base Atk +14; Grp — Atk Options Combat Reflexes  CHAPTER 1  Putting your ﬁngers to your lips to whistle, you blow a deer’s call, and a great ghostly stag appears before you.  Phantom Wolf  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: One quasi-real, staglike creature Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No  16th Level: The phantom stag’s antlers have the ghost touch (DMG 224) and wounding (DMG 226) weapon special abilities. The phantom stag gains a +6 deﬂection bonus to AC. 18th Level: The phantom stag can use etherealness on behalf of its rider (as the spell, PH 228, caster level 18th). The phantom stag gains a +8 deﬂection bonus to AC.  Abilities Str —, Dex 29, Con 18, Int 11, Wis 17, Cha 26 SQ incorporeal traits Feats Alertness, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility, Weapon Focus (bite) Skills Listen +20, Spot +20 Frightful Presence (Su) 30-ft. radius, Will DC 24 negates. Creatures with less than 12 HD become frightened for 3d6 rounds if they fail their saves. An opponent that succeeds on the save is immune to that same phantom wolf’s frightful presence for 24 hours.  You conjure forth an incorporeal white wolf with abnormally large, frosty jaws. This phantom wolf follows your mental commands, acting on your behalf as long as it remains within range and you continue to concentrate on it. A phantom wolf appears where you designate and acts as you direct on your turn. You don’t need to maintain line of effect once the spell is cast, but the spell ends if the phantom wolf is ever outside the spell’s range.  PLAGUE OF RATS  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Pestilence 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One swarm of rats/2 levels, each of which is adjacent to at least one other swarm Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  157  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Black balls of fur litter the ground, rolling aboutastheyrapidlyexpand,growingtails, feet, and snarling, diseased mouths. You summon a number of rat swarms (MM 239)—one per two caster levels—to a maximum of six swarms at 12th level. The swarms must be summoned so that each one is adjacent to at least one other swarm (that is, the swarms must ﬁll one contiguous area). You can summon the rat swarms so that they share the spaces of other creatures. Each swarm attacks any creatures occupying its space. If no living creatures are within its space, a swarm attacks or pursues the nearest creature as best it can. You have no control over its target or direction of travel.  PLANAR BUBBLE  Abjuration Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation from touched creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No; see text  PLAGUE OF UNDEAD  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One or more corpses within range Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Unleashing a cold rush of necromantic energy, you cause a host of undead to rise from the bodies of the fallen. This spell turns the bones or bodies of dead creatures into undead skeletons (MM 225) or zombies (MM 265) with maximum hit points for their Hit Dice. If you can control them, these undead follow your spoken commands. The undead remain animated until destroyed (a destroyed skeleton or zombie can’t be animated again). Regardless of the speciﬁc numbers or kinds of undead created with this spell, you can’t create more HD of undead with this spell than four times  158  of this spell or animate dead become uncontrolled. Any time you must release part of the undead that you control because of this spell or animate dead, you choose which undead are released until the total HD of undead you control is equal to four times your caster level. The bones and bodies required for this spell follow the same restrictions as animate dead. Material Component: A black sapphire worth 100 gp or several black sapphires with a total value of 100 gp.  Clerics who follow gods of pestilence can summon a plague of rats  your caster level with a single casting of plague of undead. The undead you create remain under your control indeﬁnitely. No matter how many times you use this spell or animate dead (PH 198), however, you can control only 4 HD worth of undead creatures per caster level. The limit imposed by this spell and the animate dead spell are the same, meaning that creatures you animate with either spell count against this limit. If you exceed this number, all the newly created creatures fall under your control and any excess undead from previous castings  You cast the spell and sprinkle silver dust aroundyou.Where it lands the dust sparkles and evaporates,and the elemental region around you calmsandbecomes more hospitable. This spell creates an area around the subject creature that emulates its native planar environment. Thus, a character hailing from the Material Plane would have normal gravity, temperature, magic, and so on. This spell cast on a native of the Plane of Shadow (DMG 152) would make the area around the creature mimic its home plane’s normal gravity, a mild neutral alignment, enhanced shadow spells, and impeded light or ﬁre spells.  Arcane Material Component: A sprinkling of silver dust.  PLANAR EXCHANGE  Conjuration (Calling) [see text for lesser planar exchange] Level: Cleric 6  Conjuration (Calling) [see text for lesser planar exchange] Level: Cleric 8  This spell functions like lesser planar exchange, except as noted here. You trade places with a leonal guardinal (MM 142), barbed devil (MM 51), or hezrou demon (MM 44). The called creature has full access to all its abilities, with one exception: A demon or devil you conjure can’t summon other creatures. If the creature is slain, you take 4d6 points of damage and the spell ends.  PLANAR EXCHANGE, LESSER Conjuration (Calling) Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: 0 ft. Effect: One called creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You cross your arms and close your eyes, intoning the ancient spell. There is a bright ﬂash, and another creature stands in your place. When you cast this spell, you call a celestial brown bear (MM 269), celestial griffon (MM 139), ﬁendish dire ape (MM 62), or ﬁendish tiger (MM 281), at  PLANAR TOLERANCE  Level: Cleric 4, druid 4, Elysium 2, ranger 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Duration: 1 hour/level You have barely time to bark out a few elder words of power, but then the pressure subsides, and you know you are safe long enough to complete your mission.  PLANE SHIFT, GREATER Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 8  You and the others link hands, and you concentrate on the forked copper rod. You rap the fork against your thigh and speak the words of the spell. You know where you’re going, and as the landscape around you fades, a new plane takes shape around you. This spell functions like plane shift (PH 262), except that if you have visited the desired location, the spell takes you to the precise location (rather than 5 to 500 miles distant).  CHAPTER 1  PLANAR EXCHANGE, GREATER  This spell functions like avoid planar effects (page 19), except as noted above.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like lesser planar exchange, except as noted here. You trade places with an avoral guardinal (MM 141), bone devil (MM 52), or babau demon (MM 40). The called creature has full access to all its abilities, with one exception: A demon or devil you conjure can’t summon other creatures. If the creature is slain, you take 3d6 points of damage and the spell ends.  your option, to your precise location. At the same instant, you are transported to that creature’s home plane, where you exist in stasis for the duration of the spell. To a casual observer, it appears that you have transformed into the called creature (though an onlooker who makes a DC 25 Spot check notices the slight gap in time between your disappearance and the creature’s appearance). If the called creature would not ﬁt in the place you occupied when you cast the spell, the spell fails. If the called creature is slain, you take 2d6 points of damage, the spell ends, and you are returned to your origin plane in the space last occupied by the called creature. A celestial creature (MM 31) called by this spell gains damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance equal to its HD +5; and a smite evil attack that provides a bonus equal to its HD on one damage roll. A ﬁendish creature (MM 107) called by this spell gains damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance equal to its HD +5; and a smite good attack that provides a bonus equal to its HD on one damage roll. You have full control over the creature’s actions and can perceive the environment around the called creature as if you were seeing through its eyes, hearing through its ears, and so on. While in stasis, you can’t take any actions other than to control the called creature or to dismiss the spell, nor can anything on the creature’s home plane affect you in any way. You also can’t perceive anything around your body’s location. When you dismiss the spell, or when the creature is slain, you appear in the creature’s location, and it is returned to its home plane. When you use a calling spell that calls a chaotic, evil, good, or lawful creature, it is a spell of that type.  PLANT BODY  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level Radiating out from your hands, moss and ivy covers your ﬂesh until you resemble a shambling mound. You imbue yourself with powerful transformative magic, gaining some of the characteristics of the plant type. Any spell or effect that would affect plant creatures also affects you, for the duration of plant body. When subject to this spell, you are immune to extra damage from critical hits, mind-affecting spells and abilities, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. Your ability scores, skills, and feats are unaffected (although your new form might make it difﬁcult or impossible for you to use certain skills or feats).  POISON THORNS Transmutation Level: Druid 5  Black,glisteningthornsemergefromyour skin,causingyounodamagebutendangering those who attack you in melee.  159  Illus. by L. Parillo  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Poison thorns protect a druid from a naga’s coils  This spell functions like thornskin (page 219), except as noted above, and a scratch from the thorns is sufﬁcient to deliver a dose of poison to your attacker. Any creature grappling you is exposed to the poison each round at the start of your turn. The poison from the thorns deals 1d4 points of Strength damage immediately and another 1d4 points of Strength damage 1 minute later. Each instance of damage can be negated by a successful Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your Wis modiﬁer). Material Component: A dried black rose.  POISON VINES  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 4 Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes In an instant you cause glistening green vines to spring up at your command.  160  This spell functions like vine mine (page 230), except that the vines you create  are poisonous (contact, 1d6 Dex/2d6 Dex). A successful Fortitude save is required only upon the ﬁrst entry into the spell’s area (and again 1 minute later); creatures don’t have to save each time they enter (or each round they remain within). You are immune to the poison of the vines you create, and you can select a number of other targets equal to your caster level to share this immunity.  PORTAL ALARM  Abjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: 2 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You cast a tiny bell at the portal, and it rings as you ﬁnish the last gesture of the spell. With the completion of the spell, the bell vanishes in midair, but it continues to ring for a few moments more.  Portal alarm sounds a mental or audible alarm each time a creature of Tiny or larger size passes through the magic gate or portal the spell is cast upon. You decide at the time of casting whether the portal alarm will be mental or audible. Mental Alarm: A mental alarm alerts you (and only you) as long as you remain within 1 mile of the warded area and on the same plane. You notice a mental tremor that would awaken you from a normal sleep but does not otherwise disturb concentration (it would not interfere with spellcasting). A silence spell has no effect on a mental alarm. Audible Alarm: An audible portal alarm produces the sound of a hand bell, buzzer, or other similar repeating sound that can be heard clearly up to 60 feet away, and it pierces closed doors and extends onto other planes. The ringing can be heard faintly up to 180 feet away and lasts for 1 round. Creatures within the area of a silence spell cannot hear the ringing, and if the portal itself is within the area of a silence spell, no alarm is sounded. Ethereal and astral creatures trigger a portal alarm if they pass through the portal. You can set a portal alarm with a password, determined at the time of the casting, and this password can be discerned with the analyze portal spell (page 10). Those speaking the password before passing through the portal do not set off the alarm. Material Component: A tiny bell.  PORTAL ALARM, IMPROVED  Abjuration Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Duration: 8 hours/level (D) This spell functions like portal alarm, with the following additions. • You can designate the alarm set off by an improved portal alarm to be mental, audible, or both. • If a mental alarm is chosen, you receive a mental picture of all creatures that have passed through the portal and which direction they passed through. The mental image provides information as if you were  standing 10 feet away from the portal. • You can enable another creature to receive the mental alarm instead of yourself. You must touch the creature, which receives a Will saving throw to negate the effect, if applicable.  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You alter a magic gate or portal so it sends out a mental beacon for up to six creatures, including yourself if you choose. These individuals must be known to you but need not be present at the time of casting. Once you cast portal beacon, these creatures know the direction and distance to the targeted portal for the spell’s duration. Moving to a plane other than the two connected by the portal ends the spell for that creature but leaves it intact for others. You can have any number of portal beacons tuned to you without impairing other abilities or actions.  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Bycallingontheancientandtimelessmagical energies of the elements, you complete thespell.Immediatelyyourformbeginsto change,takingonaspectsoftheelementyou envisioned while casting the spell. When you cast this spell, choose an element (air, earth, fire, or water). You assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a Medium elemental of the chosen element (MM 96–100). Primal form also grants you the elemental  PRISMATIC EYE  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Magical eye Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by C. Franks  Mentally marking the appearance and location of the portal, you implant that knowledge into others, allowing them to be drawn to the portal like a loadstone to metal.  PRIMAL FORM  CHAPTER 1  PORTAL BEACON  Each round on your turn, every living creature within 10 feet of you gains 1 hit point per three caster levels (maximum 5). Creatures can’t exceed their full normal hit point totals as a result of this effect. Undead creatures take 2 points of damage per round. Characters with immunity to positive energy effects are not affected by this aura. A positive energy aura does not affect you.  subtype appropriate to the chosen element. You gain a +4 bonus on saving throws against mind-affecting spells and abilities. There is a 25% chance that critical hits and sneak attacks scored on you are negated, as if you were wearing armor with the light fortiﬁcation special ability (DMG 219). You cannot cast spells, and you lose any spell-like, supernatural, and extraordinary abilities of your own form. You gain additional abilities depending on the element you chose when you cast the spell: Air: Fly speed 20 feet (perfect). Earth: Damage reduction 5/—. Fire: 1d4 ﬁre damage, resistance to ﬁre 10, burn (MM 98). Water: Swim 90 feet, drench (MM 101). Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Focus: A small leather pouch containing three brass bells.  Youspeaktheeldritchphrasesofpowerand an aura of white, shining, positive energy surrounds you.  Withapoppingsound,amoist,apple-sized eye with a rainbow-hued iris appears and sends a beam of colored light at the foe you designate.  POSITIVE ENERGY AURA  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The prismatic eye spell becomes more dangerous with multiple castings  161  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You create a visible orb that can produce ray effects duplicating the beams of a prismatic spray spell (PH 264). You can move the eye up to your speed as a move action, but it cannot go beyond the spell’s range. Starting in the round the eye appears, you can command it to ﬁre a ray (50-foot range) as a free action once per round. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with a ray to strike a target, but each ray uses a +6 bonus on attack rolls instead of your ranged attack bonus. A target struck by a ray suffers the effect of one beam of a prismatic spray spell (roll 1d8 to determine the effect, rerolling any result of 8), except that the save DC (if applicable) is 19. After a particular color of ray has been used, it is no longer available to the eye, and die rolls that indicate the same color are rerolled. Once all seven rays have been ﬁred, the eye remains until the spell’s duration expires. You can still move it, but it can ﬁre no more rays. The eye is a Fine object with AC 18 (+8 size) and 9 hit points. It uses your save bonuses for saving throws. Focus: A polished, rainbow-hued abalone shell.  PRISMATIC RAY  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes You feel within you, as the spell nears completion, various energies locked in a battle within your body. As nausea threatenstoovercomeyou,youcroakouttheﬁnal syllables of arcane power and point your hand. A single beam of brilliantly colored light then shoots from your outstretched hand. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. On a successful attack, a creature with 6 Hit Dice or fewer is blinded for 2d4 rounds by the prismatic ray in addition to suffering a randomly determined effect:  162  Color of 1d8 Beam Effect$ 1 Red 20 points ﬁre damage (Reflex half) 2 Orange 40 points acid damage (Reflex half) 3 Yellow 80 points electricity damage (Reflex half) 4 Green Poison (Kills; Fortitude partial, take 1d6 Con damage instead) 5 Blue Turned to stone (Fortitude negates) 6 Indigo Insane, as insanity spell (Will negates) 7 Violet Sent to another plane (Will negates) 8 — Two effects; roll twice more, ignoring any “8” results  PROBE THOUGHTS  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Mind 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Reachingoutwithyourthoughts,youbreak through your target’s mental defenses and reap answers to your desires. All of the subject’s memories and knowledge are accessible to you, ranging from memories deep below the surface to those still easily called to mind. You can learn the answer to one question per round, to the best of the subject’s knowledge. You pose the questions telepathically, and the answers to those questions are imparted directly to your mind. You and the subject do not need to speak the same language, though less intelligent creatures might yield up only appropriate visual images in answer to your questions. The subject is not aware that its mind is being probed, unless you wish to make it aware. If the subject moves beyond the range of the spell, the effect ends.  PROGRAMMED AMNESIA  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes As you ﬁnish the complicated procedure necessary to cast the spell, your target’s mind opens up to you like a book. You see the target’s memories like stories and know that you can rewrite them as a master bard rewrites the inferior works of his apprentices. You can selectively destroy, alter, or implant memories in the subject creature as you see ﬁt. Casting the spell gives you access to all of the subject’s thoughts and memories, allowing you to implement as many of the following speciﬁc effects as you like. MemoryErasure:Memoriespossessed by the subject can be erased, including knowledge of speciﬁc events, people, or places. You can erase up to one full week of memories from the subject’s mind. Memory Implant: You can create false memories in the subject’s mind as you see ﬁt. You can implant memories of being friends with a hated enemy, events that didn’t really take place, or betrayals by people the subject regards as friends. Negative Levels: You can bestow a number of negative levels equal to 1/2 the subject’s character level (rounding down, minimum 1st level) or less. This effect represents erasure of class knowledge and training. These negative levels never become permanent level loss, but they cannot be removed by spells such as restoration, instead returning at a rate of one level per day. Persona Rebuilding: By erasing the subject’s previous personality and implanting a false set of memories, you can build a new persona for the creature, altering its alignment, beliefs, values, and personality traits. (Some  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Swaddling your ally in a protective ﬁeld drawn by your hand like a blanket, you guard him against negative energy attacks.  PROTECTION FROM POSITIVE ENERGY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes A black seed of magic ﬂoats above your ﬁnger, and you implant it in the creature before you, guarding it against positive energy. The warded creature gains partial protection against positive energy effects. For as long as the spell lasts, it subtracts 10 from the hit point damage dealt by any positive energy effect (such as a cure spell) that adversely affects it. Positive energy effects that don’t deal hit point damage to the subject, such as turning attempts, affect the subject normally.  PROTÉGÉ  Transmutation Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: One creature with Intelligence 3 or higher Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You admonish your chosen subject even as you offer a supportive slap on the back. With that simple action, you complete the spell and see in your target a realization of its new abilities.  You brieﬂy grant some bard abilities to a creature of your choice. The subject of the spell can then function as a bard of one-half your current bard level with respect to bardic music and bardic knowledge. However, protégé imparts no spellcasting ability and does not grant access to spells not normally available to the subject. For Perform checks and bardic music prerequisites, the creature uses its own ranks in Perform or one-half of your ranks (modiﬁed by its own Charisma modiﬁer), whichever is better.  PUPPETEER  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  PROTECTION FROM NEGATIVE ENERGY  The warded creature gains partial protection against negative energy effects. For as long as the spell lasts, it subtracts 10 from the hit point damage dealt by any negative energy effect (such as an inﬂict spell) that adversely affects it. Negative energy effects that don’t deal hit point damage to the subject, such as an energy drain spell, affect the subject normally.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  class abilities might be affected by alignment changes.) ProgrammedTrigger:Youcanprogram the subject to delay the onset of any of the above effects until a speciﬁc event takes place, such as the receipt of a coded message, capture by enemies, or arrival at some destination. Similarly, you could specify some or all of the alterations you create in a subject to be removed by a speciﬁc event. The nature of programmed amnesia is such that a subject given new memories (whether willing or not) might be given cause to suspect that those memories are false, based on how complete your programming is. For example, a paladin subject to a persona rebuilding effect that changes her alignment to neutral loses her paladin abilities. Unless you impart a speciﬁc believable memory of why she changed alignment, the character will perceive this unexplained gap in her memory and might take steps (such as seeking a magical cure for her “amnesia”) that could negate the spell’s effect (see below). Generally, your subject must be either willing to undergo the spell or restrained in some way so that it cannot leave or interfere with the casting. Programmed amnesia cannot be dispelled, and so is normally permanent unless you care to specify events that will end the effect. Its effect can also be removed by a greater restoration, miracle, or wish spell. Material Component: A set of small crystal lenses set in gold loops worth 500 gp.  Incastingthis spell,you seewhatothers do not—stringsofsilverenergyrunningfrom your hands and feet to your target’s wrists andankles.Youwave,andshewavesback, inanawkward,resistingfashion.Youstart walking toward the edge of the cliff. . . . You force the subject to mimic your actions. The subject matches your motions exactly, though it takes a –4 penalty to Dexterity and Strength. Its movements look awkward, and its actions aren’t as effective as if it were actually doing them itself. You can try to make the subject commit a suicidal act, but it receives another Will save to break the spell. If that save is successful, the subject collapses, helpless and in a comatose state, for 1d4 rounds. Anyone observing the subject of this spell can determine that the subject’s actions are being controlled by making a DC 15 Sense Motive check (or DC 10 if the controlling bard is also visible). This spell doesn’t grant the subject extraordinary, supernatural, spell-like abilities, or spellcasting abilities, even if you have and use such abilities during the spell’s duration.  163  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  QUICK MARCH  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allies in a 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Uponcastingthisspell,yourfeetandthose of your allies glow with a yellow nimbus of light. Quick march increases your allies’ base land speed by 30 feet. (This adjustment is considered an enhancement bonus.) There is no effect on other modes of movement, such as burrow, climb, ﬂy, or swim. As with any effect that increases a creature’s speed, this spell affects maximum jumping distance.  QUICK POTION  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Flask of water touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You mutter the last of the spell’s words and wave your ﬁngers over the ﬂask. Coppery sparks drop from your ﬁngertips and suffuse the water with a deep rusty shade. As thesparksdissolvefully,youbegincasting your next spell. You transform the water in a ﬂask so that it is capable of storing a spell in the manner of a potion. On your next turn, you or another spellcaster can cast a spell into the water, transforming the water into a potion of the appropriate type. Only spells suitable for making potions can be used in this way.  QUILL BLAST  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft.  164  Area: 20-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Needle-sharp quills emerge from your skin as you begin casting this spell, then ﬂy outward in every direction when you complete the spell. Creatures within the spread of a quill blast are hit by one or more quills, depending on their size: Tiny or smaller, 4 quills; Small, 6 quills; Medium, 8 quills; Large, 10 quills; and Huge or larger, 12 quills. Small or larger creatures that make their saves are struck by half as many quills; Tiny or smaller creatures that make their saves avoid the quills completely. Each quill deals 1d6 points of damage and lodges itself into the creature it hits. Lodged quills impose a noncumulative –1 penalty on attack rolls, saves, and checks. All quills can be removed safely as a standard action with a DC 20 Heal check. Otherwise, removing the quills deals an extra 1d6 points of damage. Material Component: A porcupine quill.  QUILLFIRE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You evoke the power of nature, and the back of your hand bristles with a spikelike growth of quills. Your hand sprouts poisonous quills that you can use in melee or as a ranged attack. The quills deal 1d8 points of damage. They can be thrown (range increment 10 feet). The quills are poisonous (injury DC equal DC of quillﬁre, 1d6 Str/1d6 Str).  RADIANT ASSAULT  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.- radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Withoutstretchedhand,yougesturetoward theareawherethespellwillcomeintoeffect. Aninstantlaterablastofmulticoloredlight ﬁlls that area. This spell releases energy in the form of a multitude of rainbow-colored beams that erupt in every direction within the area designated by you. This kaleidoscopic burst of energy deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6), and all creatures within the burst are dazed for 1d6 rounds. Those that succeed on a Will save take only half normal damage and are dazzled for 1d6 rounds instead. Sightless creatures are unaffected by this spell. Focus: An eye from any outsider that has 4 or more Hit Dice.  RAGING FLAME  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 minute Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Hot, burning passion ﬁlls your soul as you completethespell.Youreleasethepassionate energy into the chosen area, causing ﬁres there to ﬂare with their own elemental desire to burn. This spell inﬂames existing ﬁre, giving it a passion to burn. All normal ﬁres within the affected area ﬂare up, burning twice as hot and twice as bright. The illumination radii of all nonmagical ﬁres double (so a torch casts bright illumination in a 40-foot radius), and all nonmagical ﬁres deal double damage (so a creature that catches on ﬁre takes 2d6 points of ﬁre damage per round). Fire that leaves the area remains affected by the spell. Fire affected by this spell burns out twice as quickly, so a torch that is the subject of a raging ﬂame spell burns  out in 30 minutes instead of the normal hour. Magical ﬁre in the area, such as from a produce ﬂame or ﬁreball spell, burns hotter, dealing +1 point of ﬁre damage per die. Raging ﬂame counters or dispels the effect of slow burn (page 192).  RAINBOW BEAM  Damage Type ﬁre acid electricity poison cold sonic force roll twice (ignore further results of 8)  Focus: A small clear gem or crystal prism worth at least 10 gp.  RAINBOW BLAST  Evocation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes From your splayed ﬁngers shoots a beam of mixed energy and multihued lights. The beam burns and freezes, sizzles and screams. This spell is a wide-spectrum blast of radiant energy composed of all ﬁve  RAISE FROM THE DEEP  Transmutation [Water] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level); see text Target: One creature or object Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Waterroilsandfoamsastheshipwreckrises to the surface. Floating now effortlessly, it bobs up and down, never sinking more than an inch.  A rainbow blast spell strikes foes with every type of energy  Illus. by M. Phillippi  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If you hit, the subject is dazzled for 1 minute. The spell also deals 1d12 points of damage per three caster levels (maximum 5d12). A rainbow beam deals a random type of damage as determined by the following table. If two types of energy are indicated, rainbow beam deals half its damage from each type  Color red orange yellow green blue indigo violet multihued  CHAPTER 1  You ﬁre a ray of swirling, multihued light drawn from radiant energies. The light’s hues wind together but remain independent.  1d8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  energy types. Rainbow blast deals 1d6 points of damage from each of the ﬁve energy types (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic), for a total of 5d6 points of damage. Creatures apply resistance to energy separately for each type of damage. As you gain in levels, the damage die increases in size. At 7th level the spell deals 5d8 points of damage, at 9th level it deals 5d10 points of damage, and at 11th level it deals 5d12 points of damage—one die for each of the ﬁve energy types. Focus: A small clear gem or crystal prism worth at least 50 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  of energy indicated. Creatures apply energy resistance separately to each type of damage.  165  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject of this spell gains magical buoyancy and ﬂoats on the surface of the water for the duration of the spell, despite its weight or normal buoyancy. It cannot swim below the surface of the water. Creatures that must breathe water can still do so. If the subject is underwater at the time this spell is cast, it rises toward the surface at a speed of 150 feet. The magic of the spell prevents the subject from taking damage from the speed of the ascent. This spell is particularly effective at raising sunken ships from the deep. If you know the exact details of the shipwreck (its appearance, its name, the date of its creation, its history, and the circumstances of its sinking), the vertical distance between you and the subject is not a factor. When cast to raise a shipwreck, the spell brings up all surviving fragments of the ship, along with any loose objects that are in contact with the ship or enclosed inside it. The ship and its fragments remain on the surface of the ocean until the spell’s duration ends, at which point the ship sinks again if it has not been repaired. (Multiple consecutive castings of the spell might be needed to keep the ship aﬂoat long enough to be fully repaired.)  RAM’S MIGHT  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You complete the casting, and your hands tingle. Ridged, hornlike ripples appear over your knuckles, nails, and the backs of your hands. You gain a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength, and your unarmed attacks deal lethal instead of nonlethal damage. You are considered armed. The spell has no other effect; you can cast spells and manipulate objects normally.  RAPID BURROWING Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, DF  166  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Splayingyourﬁngerslikeamole’sforepaws completes the spell. With your touch, the target’sdiggingappendagesincreaseinsize and sharpness. This spell increases the touched creature’s burrow speed by 20 feet. It has no effect on other modes of movement, nor does it grant the subject a burrow speed or the ability to burrow through stone if the creature cannot already do so.  RAY OF CLUMSINESS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Acracklingrayleapsfromyouroutstretched hand.Thegreenrayseemsalmostsluggish in reaching its target, though it takes only an eyeblink to do so. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The energy of the ray stiffens the subject’s muscles and joints, making it more difﬁcult for the subject to move. The subject takes a penalty to Dexterity equal to 1d6+1 per two caster levels (maximum penalty 1d6+5, minimum Dexterity 1).  RAY OF DEANIMATION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Target: One construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  A copper-red ray bursts from your outstretched hand. The sound of grinding gearsandbreakingmetalaccompaniesthe ray’s ﬂight. This ray interferes with magical animation, degenerating the magic bound within constructs and effectively causing damage. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The ray deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level to the subject (maximum 15d6).  RAY DEFLECTION  Abjuration Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Asthespelliscast,abriefshimmeringﬁeld appears around you. Small motes of silver ﬂoat within the ﬁeld. For the duration of the spell, you are protected against ranged touch attacks, including ray spells and ray attacks made by creatures. Any ray attack directed at you is automatically reﬂected harmlessly away. Focus: A glass prism.  RAY OF DIZZINESS  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You release a drab violet ray from your palm. The ray shoots toward your target in a spiraling corkscrew. You strike out at your enemy with a ray that causes intense feelings of vertigo. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A struck subject experiences strong feelings of vertigo and can take only a  move action or a standard action each round (but not both, and it cannot take a full-round action). Focus: A small top.  RAY OF ENTROPY  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If your attack is successful, the ray deals 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). The target must also make a Reﬂex save or catch ﬁre, taking 1d6 points of ﬁre damage each round until the ﬂames are put out (requiring a DC 15 Reﬂex save; see Catching on Fire, DMG 303). Focus: A small, polished glass lens.  RAY OF SICKNESS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./ 2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  Beware the wizard who masters rays  A cyan ray beams from your ﬁngertips. You shudder with cold as the ray leaves your hand. You launch a ray of numbing cold at your enemy. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If successful, the ray deals 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). The target must also make a Reﬂex save or be frozen to the ground with its feet encased in ice. A frozen creature cannot move, receives no Dexterity bonus to AC, and incurs a –2 penalty on attack rolls. A frozen creature can free itself with a DC 18 Strength check or by dealing 15 points of damage to the ice. Material Component: Ice or a vial of melted mountain snow.  Illus. by S. Belledin  A burning ray shoots out at the target from your upturned palm. The sound of a crackling ﬁre follows the ray’s path.  CHAPTER 1  You direct a short ray at the eyes of a target. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. With a successful ranged touch attack, the subject is blinded for 1d4 rounds.  When you cast this spell, you unleash a ray of negative energy that consumes the life energy of the subject. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If your attack is successful against a living creature, the ray makes the subject weaker, slower, and less healthy. The subject takes a –4 penalty to Strength, Constitution, and Dexterity for the duration of the spell.  Evocation [Flame] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Evocation [Light] Level: Bard 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Yourpalmemitsarayoflight.Theraygives off a soft, continuous glow.  Youreleaseacracklingblack ray. The smell of decay ﬁlls the air.  RAY OF FLAME  RAY OF LIGHT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  RAY OF ICE  Holding your outstretched hand palm down,youﬁreasicklygreenray.Yourhand feelscoldandclammyforafewsecondsafter the ray ﬂies forth. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If your ranged touch attack hits, the subject becomes sickened.  RAY OF STUPIDITY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A bright yellow beam bursts from your extended ﬁngertips. The beam emits an  167  Illus. by C. Dien  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  “uh” sound, like someone trying to think of a word. This ray clouds the mind of your enemy, damaging its intellect. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A subject struck by the ray takes 1d4+1 points of Intelligence damage. If the target is a wizard, she might temporarily lose the ability to cast some or all of her spells if her Intelligence drops too low. Material Component: A miniature cone-shaped hat.  RAY OF WEAKNESS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  REALITY MAELSTROM  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space, and 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on the same point; see text Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates, Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes A lightning strike and a tearing sound as loud as thunder ﬁlls the area as a hole in space opens. Wind rushes into the void,  and objects nearby lift into the air as everything is drawn inexorably toward the rip in reality. You tear a temporary hole in reality itself that sucks all loose material and living creatures into it, sending them to a random plane (see sidebar). Everything sucked into the reality maelstrom goes to the same plane. Reality maelstrom has a primary area and a secondary area. The primary area is the hole itself: a sphere with a 20-foot radius centered on the spell’s point of origin. Within that area, all unattended objects weighing 100 pounds or less are sucked into the maelstrom, as are all individuals who fail a Will saving throw.  A dark ray ﬂies forth from your hand. The air ﬁlls with the smell of blood. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The target of this ray feels weaker and takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls. Its speed is reduced by 10 feet.  RAZORFANGS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You speak the words of this spell and your clawsshinewithlustrousyellowradiance, growing more slender and sharper as you watch. Choose one of your natural weapons that deals slashing or piercing damage (such as a bite or a single claw). That natural weapon’s threat range doubles (in most cases, becoming 19–20). The effect of this spell does not stack with any other effects that increase a weapon’s threat range.  168  Reality maelstrom creates a hole in the cosmology of the planes  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No  Bringing to your lips some of the most elemental words of arcane power, you feel stirring within you the spirits of ancient  This spell functions like dispel magic (PH 223), except that your caster level for your dispel check is a maximum of +20 instead of +10, and (as with greater dispel magic) you have a chance to dispel any effect that remove curse can remove, even if dispel magic can’t dispel that effect. When casting a targeted dispel or counterspell, you can choose to reave each spell you successfully dispel, stealing its power and effect for yourself. When making a targeted dispel, make a Spellcraft check (DC 25 + spell level) to identify the target spell or each ongoing spell currently in effect on the target creature or object. Each spell you dispel with a targeted dispel can be reaved if you so desire, and the spell’s effects are redirected to you, continuing as if cast on you by the original caster with no interruption to or extension of duration. Once you reave the spell, you identify it if you haven’t done so already (see below). If the subject was the caster and the spell is dismissible, you can dismiss it as if you had cast it yourself. Likewise, if the subject was the caster and the spell requires concentration, you must  concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect as if you had cast it yourself. You can still attempt to reave a spell you didn’t identify with your Spellcraft check, but doing so can be risky if you don’t know the speciﬁcs of the spell’s effect. For example, if you fail to identity an ongoing spell effect on an enemy character and choose to reave anyway, you might ﬁnd yourself under the inﬂuence of the dominate person effect that character was suffering from. Any spell resistance you might have has no effect against harmful spells you might inadvertently reave, but you get the same chance to save against those spell effects as the original target. If you choose to reave a spell you have successfully counterspelled with reaving dispel, you seize control of the spell after the enemy caster completes it, and you can redirect the spell to whatever targets or area you wish (including the original caster, if appropriate). Again, you must make a Spellcraft check (DC 25 + spell level) to identify the spell you intend to reave, but you are free to choose to redirect a spell whose effect, range, and area you don’t know. If the redirected spell’s correct casting conditions aren’t met (because you guess at an improper target or range, for example), the spell fails.  CHAPTER 1  REAVING DISPEL  mages as you prepare to absorb the spell energies you have targeted. Your body shakes uncontrollably, as if eagerly anticipating the power behind those spells.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The rip also creates a windstorm of air that affects objects and creatures in the secondary area of the spell. The secondary area is all the space farther than 20 feet from the spell’s point of origin but not farther than 40 feet away. All unattended objects within the secondary area that weigh 50 pounds or less are drawn into the primary area of the maelstrom. Individuals within the secondary area must make a Reﬂex saving throw. Those who fail are sucked into the primary area and must then make a Will saving throw to avoid being drawn into the maelstrom. Individuals who succeed on either saving throw can move and attack as normal. A reality maelstrom is a one-way portal, so nothing ever emerges from the hole the spell makes. Material Component: A golden hoop no less than 1 inch across. RANDOM PLANAR DESTINATIONS  Spells such as prismatic spray, reality maelstrom, and scramble portal, and items such as an amulet of the planes and a staff of power can send an individual to a random plane. The list of available planes varies according to the cosmology you’ve chosen. An example using the D&D cosmology is presented in the next column. Transitive Planes such as the Ethereal Plane, the Astral Plane, and the Plane of Shadow should not be considered for such random destinations. The layer and exact location on the particular plane is up to the DM. Transportation to a random plane does not guarantee survival there, and individuals who risk such effects should be aware of the dangers. If an individual is someplace other than the Material Plane when randomly switching planes, simply replace the plane of origin’s entry on the table with the Material Plane. Thus, a staff of power broken on the Elemental Plane of Fire sends the wielder to the Material Plane if a 91 is rolled.  Random Planar Destinations d% Plane 01–05 Heroic Domains of Ysgard 06–10 Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo 11–15 Windswept Depths of Pandemonium 16–20 Infinite Layers of the Abyss 21–25 Tarterian Depths of Carceri 26–30 Gray Waste of Hades 31–35 Bleak Eternity of Gehenna 36–40 Nine Hells of Baator 41–45 Infernal Battleﬁeld of Acheron 46–50 Clockwork Nirvana of Mechanus 51–55 Peaceable Kingdoms of Arcadia 56–60 Seven Mounting Heavens of Celestia 61–65 Twin Paradises of Bytopia 66–70 Blessed Fields of Elysium 71–75 Wilderness of the Beastlands 76–80 Olympian Glades of Arborea 81–89 Concordant Domain of the Outlands 90–91 Elemental Plane of Fire 92–93 Elemental Plane of Earth 94–95 Elemental Plane of Air 96–97 Elemental Plane of Water 98 Positive Energy Plane 99 Negative Energy Plane 100 Demiplane of DM’s choice 169  Reaving dispel can be used to cast an area dispel with the increased maximum caster level, but any magical effects so dispelled cannot be reaved.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  REBUKE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2, Hades 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You rap the switch in your hand and then sharply against your thigh, ﬁnishing the ﬁnal gesture that will bring discomfort to your foe. When the spell is cast, the subject is dazed for 1 round and shaken for the duration of the spell. Furthermore, a spellcaster targeted by rebuke must make a successful Concentration check (DC equal to the save DC for this spell + the level of the spell being cast) to cast spells while under its effect. Focus: A stick at least 1 foot long.  REBUKE, FINAL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Saving Throw: Will partial You jab the stick into your side and twist it, causing yourself some discomfort but creating a killing pain in the target. This spell functions like rebuke, except that the target dies instantly if it fails its saving throw. A creature that survives this effect is dazed for 1 round.  REBUKE, GREATER  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 This spell functions like rebuke, except that the subject is cowering for 1d4 rounds instead of being dazed for 1 round.  170  REBUKING BREATH Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  Your expel your breath weapon, and it is ﬁlled with dancing white sparks that swarm around your foes and freeze them with fear. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you imbue your breath weapon with negative energy that rebukes undead in its area. Undead within the area of your breath weapon that fail their saving throws against it cower as if in awe for 1 round.  RECIPROCAL GYRE  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature or object Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half, then Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No You ﬁnger the tiny loop of wire in your hands as you complete the spell. You manipulate the magical aura of the target, creatingadamagingfeedbackreaction,and the target explodes with white sparks. The subject takes 1d12 points of damage per functioning spell or spell-like ability currently affecting it (maximum 25d12). In addition, any creature so affected that fails its Will save must then succeed on a Fortitude save or be dazed for 1d6 rounds. Only spells speciﬁcally targeted on the creature in question can be used to create the backlash of a reciprocal gyre, so spells that affect an area can’t be used to deal reciprocal damage to creatures within their area. Likewise, persistent or continuous effects from magic items  can’t be used to deal reciprocal damage, but targeted spell effects can be. Material Component: A tiny closed loop of copper wire.  RECITATION  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 4, Puriﬁcation 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: All allies and foes within a 60-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Byrecitingasacredpassageordeclaration, you invoke your deity’s blessing upon yourself and your allies. The spell affects all allies within the spell’s area at the moment you cast it. Your allies gain a +2 luck bonus to AC, on attack rolls, and on saving throws, or a +3 luck bonus if they worship the same deity as you. Divine Focus: In addition to your holy symbol, this spell requires a sacred text as a divine focus.  RED TIDE  Evocation [Water] Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Asyoucompletethespell,asurging,frothingwaveofthick,redseawaterwashesover everything in the area. All creatures in the area of a red tide spell are immediately knocked prone and must make a Fortitude saving throw. A creature that makes its Fortitude save against a red tide is sickened for 1 minute. A creature that fails this saving throw is nauseated for 1 minute, and it takes 2d6 points of Strength damage. After 1 minute, the nausea ends but the creature must make a second Fortitude saving throw or take an additional 2d6  illusion. For example, a creature that touched you and realized that the tactile sensation did not match the visual one would be entitled to such a save. A creature with the scent ability automatically gets a Will save if you are within its scent range.  A metallic stretching sound, as if a thin sheet of metal were bowed then released, echoes forth from youroutstretchedhand.Youcansee for just an instant a glowing grid that deﬁnes the protected area of your spell.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Duration: 10 minutes/ level Thecreatureshrinksrapidly before your eyes. This spell functions like reduce person (PH 269), except as noted above.  You invoke the spell and, to your eyes, you are covered with a glittering net of sparks and spangles. To the eyes of the drow in the underground marketplace, you look like just another dark elf. Areﬂectivedisguisespellcausesanyintelligent creature viewing you to perceive you as the same species and gender as itself, provided that its size category is no more than one step different from your own. The spell changes perceptions of clothing, race, and gender. Reﬂective disguise does not give you any knowledge of the abilities or mannerisms of the reﬂected form, nor does it alter the perceived tactile (touch), audible (sound), or olfactory (smell) properties of you or your equipment. A creature that interacts with the glamer, beyond simply viewing it, gets a Will save to recognize it as an  Red tide bowls over, nauseates, and weakens foes  REFLECTIVE DISGUISE, MASS Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 12 hours (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  You cast the spell, and your allies all suddenlyappeartobemembersofthesame orc tribe you plan to inﬁltrate. This spell functions like reﬂective disguise, except you can change the appearance of other creatures as well. Affected creatures resume their normal appearances if slain. An unwilling target can negate the spell’s effect on itself by making a successful Will save or with spell resistance.  You create a special ward that prevents unauthorized spellcasters or creatures with spell-like abilities from entering an area. Any creature that has spells prepared, spell slots available for casting without preparation, or innate spell-like abilities must succeed on a Will save or be halted by an invisible barrier that prevents passage. The DC of the Will save increases by a number equal to the spell level of the highestlevel spell the creature has prepared or is capable of casting (so that a 10th-level sorcerer who hasn’t yet depleted his 5thlevel spell slots for the day adds 5 to the save DC). You can choose to designate a password or special condition (such as character race, alignment, possession of a token, or any other observable or detectable characteristic) by which spellcasting characters and creatures can enter the refusal-warded area. Creatures that have no spellcasting capability or spell-like abilities (including spellcasters who have used up their spell slots and creatures with spell trigger or spell completion magic items) can pass through the barrier with no difﬁculty. Spellcasters and creatures that have spell-like abilities and that are already within the area you protect when you create the ward are not compelled to leave or restricted in their movement within it (and spells and spell-like abilities can pass through the barrier in either direction with no difﬁculty). However, if such creatures  Illus. by J. Nelson  REFLECTIVE DISGUISE  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect and Area: Invisible ward that occupies two 10-ft. squares/ level (S) Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  REDUCE PERSON, GREATER  REFUSAL  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  points of Strength damage. Creatures that are immune to poison are immune to these effects of a red tide. Creatures with the ﬁre subtype take 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6), or half with a successful Reﬂex save. The tainted water evoked by this spell vanishes almost immediately, and any objects or creatures in the area do not emerge wet.  171  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  leave the area, they must succeed on saving throws as described above to return. Creatures attempting to use any teleportation spell or effect to enter the warded area make the normal saving throw. They are shunted harmlessly to the nearest safe space outside the warded area if they fail. Material Component: A pinch of dust from a wizard’s tomb.  REGAL PROCESSION  REJUVENATION COCOON  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing creature touched Duration: 2 rounds Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Paladin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Effect: One mount/level  Illus. by R. Spears  Youtossabitofhorsehairintotheair, and as it drifts toward the ground, an array of ﬁnely adorned mounts appears. This spell functions like mount (PH 256), except you can summon several mounts. Each comes with a bit and bridle, riding saddle, saddle blanket, ribbons, adornments, and a banner. You select the colors of the horses and the livery, either or both of which can include a heraldic or personal symbol.  Withasternwordofdisallowance,youcast thespell.Abarelyperceptiblehumsounds in the direction you indicate. A creature in the area must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or be pushed away from you to a distance of 5 feet per caster level. If the creature is pushed into a wall or similarly solid surface, it takes 1d6 points of damage for every 10 feet it was moved. Movement forced by this spell can take the creature beyond the spell’s range.  172  REJUVENATIVE CORPSE  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: One humanoid that died within the past week Duration: 24 hours or until discharged; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Hunger gnaws at your innards as you complete the spell. Your hands glow with black crackling energy,whichdischargesintothe corpse you touch. For a moment, the corpse glows with a similar blackness before fading.  REJECTION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  The cocoon has hardness 10 and 10 hit points per caster level. If it is destroyed, the spell ends. Material Component: A cocoon of a butterﬂy.  Feasting on a rejuvenative corpse gives undead the power to heal wounds  You pass your hand over the body of your friend,drawingacocoonofglowingyellowgreen energy about him. When you cast the spell, the rejuvenation cocoon forms around the subject. One round after the cocoon forms, it heals the subject of 10 points of damage per caster level (maximum 150 hit points) and purges the subject of poison and disease. At the end of the second round, the rejuvenation cocoon dissipates and the subject emerges, able to move and act freely. The cocoon is made of force, but it is somewhat ﬂexible and responds to pressure from the inside of the cocoon. The subject can’t move from the space it is in while cocooned, however.  You charge a dead body with negative energy, giving it the ability to heal an undead creature that dines upon its ﬂesh. The corpse remains charged with this energy for up to 24 hours. If an undead creature eats a full meal of the corpse’s ﬂesh within this time (a humanlike undead creature, such as a ghoul, generally taking 10 minutes), the undead gains fast healing 1 upon completing its feast, which lasts for the next 5 minutes. This effect does not stack with any fast healing the undead has from other sources. This spell does not allow the undead to regrow or attach lost body parts. Eating the ﬂesh discharges the spell from the corpse. You can cast this spell multiple times on a corpse, allowing more than one undead to beneﬁt from eating it, though a single undead gorging itself on multiple “meals” does not gain any extra beneﬁt while the ﬁrst meal is in effect (the fast healing does not stack). A typical Medium corpse is usually enough for ten such meals, a Small  corpse ﬁve, Tiny two, and Diminutive one. A living creature that eats a charged corpse must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or immediately contract ﬁlth fever (DMG 292; no incubation time). Creatures that are neither alive nor undead and eat the charged corpse are unaffected.  With a touch of a wax-covered ﬁnger to the subject, you inhale deeply and smell nothing. This spells hides the scent of the creature or object touched for the duration of the spell. The scent ability (MM 314) cannot detect a creature under the effect of a remove scent spell. It also negates the harmful effects of the noxious stench exuded by certain creatures, such as ghasts, for the duration of the spell. Material Component: A pinch of unscented candle wax.  RENEWAL PACT  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 7, Pact 7 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched Duration: Permanent until triggered Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Calling upon your deity to aid your ally, you bind a protective spell to your friend, leaving a tattoolike mark of your deity’s holy symbol on his skin. This spell remains dormant until the subject is subjected to one or more of the following adverse conditions:  REPAIR CRITICAL DAMAGE Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4  The smell of grease and the distant echo of clanking gears greet your senses as you complete this spell. Upon touching the intended construct, the grease smell and gear sounds disappear. Major dents and scratches disappear from the construct, as do cuts, tears, and abrasions. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 4d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20).  REPAIR LIGHT DAMAGE Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Construct touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Asasculptormassagingaroughspotofclay into something less abrasive, your touch smooths over the dents and dings of the construct you touch. When laying your hand upon a construct that has at least 1 hit point remaining, you transmute its structure to repair the damage it has taken. The spell repairs 1d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +5).  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0  As if with the eye of an expert craftsman, your touch draws out a minor dent in the construct’s surface. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 1 point of damage to a construct.  REPAIR MODERATE DAMAGE  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  REPAIR MINOR DAMAGE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  REMOVE SCENT  ability damage, blinded, confused, dazed, dazzled, deafened, diseased, exhausted, fatigued, feebleminded, insanity, nauseated, sickened, stunned, or poisoned. One round after the subject is affected by a condition that triggers the renewal pact, the subject receives a panacea spell (page 152) at a caster level equal to that of the caster of the renewal pact. A creature can be subject to only one renewal pact at a time. Casting renewal pact on a subject who already has an untriggered renewal pact voids the earlier pact. Material Component: A topaz worth at least 500 gp.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2  Your touch eliminates the wear and tear from the construct’s body. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 2d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10) to a construct.  REPAIR SERIOUS DAMAGE Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3  With a touch, you mold the battered construct’s form to be more like it was on its day of creation. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 3d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +15) to a construct.  REPLICATE CASTING  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round; see text Range: See text Effect: One spell or spell-like ability Duration: See text Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: See text The enemy mage raises her hands, and a cone of swirling, multicolored winds appears at her ﬁngertips. Then she laughs and says, “Can you do that?” You smile and reply, “I can now.”  173  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You duplicate the effect of any one spell or spell-like ability you have seen within the last round. This spell can duplicate only spells and spell-like abilities of 8th level or lower. This duplication functions like the ability of a wish spell to duplicate another spell, except that it is not limited by type of spell (divine or arcane) or by what school the effect is from. If the casting time of the spell you observed is greater than 1 round, the casting time of this spell is increased to the same. A duplicated spell or spell-like ability functions as if you had the appropriate spell prepared and were casting it yourself. If the spell or ability has an XP cost, you must pay that XP cost. If the spell has a costly material component, you must provide that component or pay an additional XP cost equal to the gold piece value of that component divided by 5.  RESIST ENERGY, MASS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart You call upon the protective energies of magicalpower,surroundingyoursubjects in temporarily visible ﬁelds of energy. Althoughtheﬁeldsfadefromview,youcan still just barely sense their existence. This spell functions like resist energy (PH 272), except that it affects all targeted creatures.  RESIST PLANAR ALIGNMENT Abjuration Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, Hades 2, Limbo 2, paladin 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  174  Youcantellthatyourtargetfeelstheoppression of the plane around you, the rank evil  oftheplace.Afewspokenphrases,backed by magical power, and that oppression seems to lift. This abjuration grants a creature limited protection from a plane’s alignment traits (DMG 149). When the subject visits a plane with an alignment trait, this spell grants it immunity to penalties on its Charisma-based checks that mildly aligned planes impose on visitors of opposed alignments. The Charisma-, Wisdom-, and Intelligencebased check penalties associated with strongly aligned planes are halved while the spell’s duration lasts.  Yourquickmovementsandrapidutterances release the spell’s energy, culminating in a ﬁnal cry that unleashes a tremendous bolt of sonic energy from your open hand. The bolt of sonic energy deals 1d4 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d4) to each creature within its area. In addition, a resonating bolt deals full damage to objects and can easily shatter or break interposing barriers. If the bolt destroys a barrier, it can continue beyond the barrier if its range permits; otherwise, it stops.  RESTORATION, MASS  Abjuration Level: Bard 4, cleric 4, druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Duration: 24 hours  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 7 Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  Justasyoutouchthespell’ssubject,afeeling of peace and watchful guardianship ﬁlls your being.  Hurling diamond dust into the air, you call out to your deity, and a sparkling aura brieﬂy surrounds those you wish to heal.  This spell functions like resistance (PH 272), except as noted here. You grant the subject a +3 resistance bonus on saves.  This spell functions like restoration (PH 272), except as noted above.  RESISTANCE, GREATER  RESISTANCE, SUPERIOR Abjuration Level: Bard 6, cleric 6, druid 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Duration: 24 hours  As you ﬁnish casting the spell, you feel imbued with the feeling that something greater than yourself is protecting you. Whenyoutouchyourintendedsubjectand release the spell, the feeling disappears. This spell functions like resistance (PH 272), except as noted here. You grant the subject a +6 resistance bonus on saves.  RESONATING BOLT  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: 60-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  RESURGENCE  Abjuration Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) By laying hands on your ally and saying a brief prayer, you convince a higher power to grant him a second chance. The subject of a resurgence spell can make a second attempt to save against an ongoing spell, spell-like ability, or supernatural ability, such as dominate person. If the subject of resurgence is affected by more than one ongoing magical effect, the subject chooses one of them to retry the save against. If the subject succeeds on the saving throw on the second attempt, the effect ends immediately. Resurgence never restores hit points or ability score damage, but it does eliminate any conditions such  as shaken, fatigued, or nauseated that were caused by a spell, spell-like ability, or supernatural ability. If a spell, spell-like ability, or supernatural ability doesn’t allow a save (such as power word stun), then resurgence won’t help the subject recover.  RESURGENCE, MASS  This spell functions like resurgence, except as noted here. The spell grants a second save attempt against a single spell or ability chosen by you. For instance, if three of your allies have been mind blasted by mind ﬂayers and two others have been turned into toads by baleful polymorph spells, you must choose to affect either the mind blast (granting three new save attempts) or the baleful polymorphs (granting two new save attempts).  REVEILLE  Necromancy [Language-Dependent] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: One recently dead creature Duration: 5 rounds Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You touch the body and intone a lament, calling out to the living memory of the creature.Tendrilsofmysticalenergysparkle around the creature’s lips, and it begins to speak. You cause a creature that has been dead for up to three days to reveal information about events that led up to its death. The corpse speaks tersely in its native language, using no more than a dozen words or so in a round. In the ﬁrst round, it describes the last thing it saw. In the second, it describes its dying wish. In the third, it describes  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Bard 6, blackguard 4, cleric 4, paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Dead ally touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourushtoyourfallencompanionamidthe chaosofthebattleandcryoutthewordsthat will bring her back for one last ﬁght. This spell brings a dead ally temporarily back to life. The subject can have been dead for up to 1 round per level. Your target functions as if a raise dead spell (PH 268) had been cast upon her, except that she does not lose a level and has half of her full normal hit points. She is alive (not undead) for the duration of the spell and can be healed normally, but dies as soon as the spell ends. While under the effect of this spell, the subject is not affected by spells that raise the dead. The subject gains a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks against the creature that killed her.  REVERSE ARROWS  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged As you clasp the shell in one hand and the ball of sap in the other, a silver radiance ﬂecked with blue lines surrounds you. You pocket the items, but the radiance remains. This spell functions like protection from arrows (PH 266), except as noted here. If any projectile ﬁred from a ranged weapon that strikes you has all its damage negated by your damage  CHAPTER 1  Throwing out your hand and calling upon your deity for favor, you give your allies a chance to free themselves of the baleful magic.  REVENANCE  reduction (10/magic), the projectile is turned back upon the creature that ﬁred it. The attacker’s attack roll is used to determine if the reversed projectile strikes the attacker, but the damage is rerolled. If the attacker is also protected by a reverse arrows spell, it is possible for the projectile to bounce between both individuals until one of the spells is discharged from accumulated damage. Once this spell has prevented a total of 10 points of damage per caster level (maximum 100 points), it is discharged. Focus: A piece of shell from a tortoise and a ball of tree sap.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Abjuration Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, paladin 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  the attack that killed it. In the fourth, it tells who killed it. In the ﬁfth, it tells why it believes it was killed.  REVIVE OUTSIDER  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Dead outsider touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Sprinkling the components of its home plane over the body of the outsider, you chant and pass around the corpse three times. With the ﬁnal words of the spell, the outsider’s eyes open, alive once more. You restore life to a dead outsider, as with the raise dead spell (PH 268). You can restore to life any creature of the outsider type of up to your level in Hit Dice, and the creature can have been dead for any length of time. Material Components: A bit of soil, water, or other unworked, natural material from the outsider’s native plane, and a diamond worth at least 5,000 gp.  REVIVE UNDEAD  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Deathbound 5, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Destroyed undead creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  175  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  176  Even fallen angels can be brought to life and light again with the revive outsider spell  Touching the corpse of the creature, you whisper to its departed spirit, calling it back—but not to life. Your restore animation to an undead creature destroyed by hit point loss (even a zombie or skeleton, which can’t normally be reanimated once destroyed). You can revive a destroyed undead creature that has been inactive for up to one day per caster level. In addition, the subject’s animating spirit must be free and willing to return. If the subject’s animating spirit is not willing to return, the spell does not work; therefore, subjects that want to revive receive no saving throw. Revive undead restores hit points to the subject up to a total of 1 hit point per Hit Die. The body of the undead to be revived must be whole. Otherwise, missing parts are still missing when the creature is reanimated. None of the dead creature’s equipment or possessions are affected in any way by this spell. An undead that has been destroyed by a turning effect can’t be revived by this spell. The subject of the spell loses one level or Hit Die (if it doesn’t have a character class level, it loses a HD) when  it is revived. This level loss cannot be repaired by any spell. If the subject is 1st level, it loses 2 points of Charisma instead. An undead that was destroyed with spells prepared has a 50% chance of losing any given spell upon being revived, in addition to losing spells for losing a level. A spellcasting undead creature that doesn’t prepare spells (such as a sorcerer) has a 50% chance of losing any given unused spell slot as if it had been used to cast a spell, in addition to losing spell slots for losing a level. Material Component: A black pearl worth at least 5,000 gp.  REVIVIFY  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Dead creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Thediamondsvaporizefromyourhandas you cast this spell, and the vapors they give off wrap around your fallen companion, dragging her soul back into her mortal form.  Revivify miraculously restores life to a recently deceased creature. However, the spell must be cast within 1 round of the victim’s death. Before the soul of the deceased has completely left the body, this spell halts its journey while repairing somewhat the damage to the body. This spell functions like raise dead (PH 268), except that the raised creature receives no level loss, no Constitution loss, and no loss of spells. The creature has –1 hit points (but is stable). MaterialComponent:Diamondsworth at least 1,000 gp.  RHINO’S RUSH  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1, ranger 1, Wrath 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round A violent fury consumes you. You seek nothing more than to charge at your enemies and bash in their heads. This spell allows you to propel yourself in a single deadly charge. The ﬁrst charge attack you make before the end  of the round deals double damage on a successful hit.  RIGHTEOUS AURA  You are bathed in an unearthly glow for the duration of the spell, as if a daylight spell (PH 216) had been cast on you. You get a +4 sacred bonus to Charisma. If you die, your body is converted into an explosive blast of energy in a 20-foot-radius burst centered where you fell, dealing 2d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6) to all evil creatures in the burst’s area. Good creatures in the area are healed by the same amount, and undead take double this damage. Spell resistance cannot prevent this damage, but a successful Reﬂex save reduces it to half. Your body is disintegrated, so you cannot be raised with a raise dead spell. Spells that do not require an intact body, such as true resurrection, can be used to bring you back to life as normal.  RIGHTEOUS FURY  Transmutation Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You pull a holy aura about you that glows a golden red. Summoning the power of your deity, you charge yourself with positive energy. This gives you 5 temporary hit points per caster level (maximum 50) and a +4 sacred bonus to Strength. These temporary hit points last for up to 1 hour.  Whenyoucastthisspell,youﬁreyourallies and companions with a divine madness or fury, greatly enhancing their combat ability. Allies gain one additional melee attack each round, at their highest attack bonus, when making a full attack. (This additional attack is not cumulative with other effects that grant extra attacks, such as a haste spell.) They also gain a +3 morale bonus on melee attack rolls and damage rolls. (This bonus on melee attack rolls does stack with the bonus provided by haste.)  RING OF BLADES  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level Asyoutwirlthesmalldaggerinyourhand, itslowlyfadesfromexistenceandisreplaced by dozens of larger blades swirling about you in a horizontal ring. This spell conjures a horizontal ring of swirling metal blades around you. The ring extends 5 feet from you, into all squares adjacent to your space, and it moves with you as you move. Each round, at the beginning of your turn, and also when you cast the spell, the blades deal 1d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10) to all creatures in the affected area. Spell resistance does not apply to the damage dealt, but a creature’s damage reduction does apply. The blades are treated as magic, silvered, and slashing  RUBY RAY OF REVERSAL  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One natural or magical hazard; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Youinvokethepowersofgoodandlaw,and inresponsetoyourpleas,youglowwiththe golden radiance of the sun.  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 5, Puriﬁcation 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: Allies within a 30-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Material Component: A small dagger.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Abjuration [Good, Light] Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  RIGHTEOUS WRATH OF THE FAITHFUL  From your ﬁngertips springs a thin line of bright red light to negate the hazard before you. Each version of this spell can target one of the hazards described below and “correct” it in the manner described. Unless speciﬁcally stated otherwise, this spell affects magical and mundane hazards of the indicated type equally. For example, a ruby ray of reversal can eliminate the webs of a monstrous spider or the effect of a web spell. • Any trap targeted by the ray is sprung. This version of the spell can have adverse effects on creatures standing within a trap’s area. You must be aware of a trap to cast ruby ray of reversal on it. • The spell unties knots and causes chains, manacles, and similar restraining devices to fall away. Entangle and similar magical effects are dispelled. Doors (or chests, drawers, cabinets, and so on) that are locked, barred, or under the effect of an arcane lock spell are opened. • A 5-foot-diameter hole is created in a wall of force, forcecage, or similar spell or effect. This function of the spell does not destroy the targeted effect, but creatures trapped by it might be able to wriggle free. • A creature that has been polymorphed, turned to stone, or otherwise transformed from its natural state is returned to its natural form. • A magic jar spell is dispelled if a ruby ray of reversal targets the crystal holding the caster’s soul.  177  • Webs, slime, grease, and other substances that would hamper movement are destroyed in a 20-foot-radius spread. Focus: A ruby worth at least 500 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  RUIN DELVER’S FORTUNE  Transmutation Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1d4 rounds  Youinvokethepowersofnature,andagreat fountainrisesupbeforeyou,sendingwaves in all directions. Cold water gushes in a great wave outward from the point you choose, violently spreading to the limits of the area. This wave makes a bull rush attempt against each creature in the affected area without provoking attacks of opportunity. The wave has a +15 bonus on the opposed Strength check. If the wave wins the opposed Strength check, the defender is moved 5  In desperate need, you cry out a word imbuedwithpower,grantingyou a bit of extra luck when you need it most.  Illus. by C. Frank  When the spell is cast, choose from one of the following effects. • Gain a luck bonus on Fortitude saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and immunity to poison. • Gain a luck bonus on Reﬂex saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and the evasion ability. • Gain a luck bonus on Will saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and immunity to fear effects. • Gain temporary hit points equal to 4d8 + your Cha modiﬁer. These hit points vanish at the end of the spell’s duration. You can cast this spell multiple times. Each time you do, choose a different beneﬁt.  RUSHING WATERS  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 15-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No  178  The rust ray spell can destroy a weapon in the blink of an eye  feet directly away from the spell’s point of origin, plus an additional 5 feet for every 5 points by which the wave’s check result exceeds that of the defender. Any creature moved 5 or more feet by rushing waters must succeed on a Reﬂex save or fall prone. The wave also drenches anything in its area and extinguishes any normal ﬁre as large as a bonﬁre.  RUST RAY  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray  Target: One nonmagical ferrous object or one ferrous creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None or Fortitude negates (object); see text Spell Resistance: No Youunleasharussetrayatametallicobject. The air around you smells of hot metal. This russet ray corrodes metal that it touches. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. It can effectively destroy any nonmagical iron or iron alloy object. Such objects struck by a rust ray take 2d6 points of damage +1 per two caster levels (maximum +10), ignoring hardness. You can also target a weapon being wielded or metal armor being worn. Metal armor affected by this ray takes normal damage from the spell and loses 1d4 points of Armor Class through corrosion. If an item is reduced to 0 hit points, it is destroyed. Ferrous creatures struck by the ray take the same damage as objects. Magic items can negate the effect with a successful Fortitude saving throw. Material Component: Rust particles or a piece of a rust monster.  SACRED HAVEN  Abjuration [Good] Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: You and allies in a 30-ft.radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A rosy glow passes from your hand and brieﬂy spreads around you. You and affected allies gain a +2 sacred bonus to Armor Class. In addition, while protected by this spell, an affected creature retains its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class when ﬂat-footed or when struck by an invisible attacker.  For the duration of the spell, you gain awareness of the health of all affected creatures, as with the status spell (PH 284), and you need not be able to touch the affected creatures to heal them with your lay on hands ability. Use of the lay on hands ability still requires a standard action, but it can be done at any range, as long as you and your target are on the same plane.  Youpressyourhandagainstthegroundand intonetheancientwords.Agreenradiance spreads from your hand, forming a ring of translucent jade ﬂames. “We’re safe,” you tell your allies, “for the moment.” You make an area safe from attacks. This spell’s beneﬁt functions much like that of the sanctuary spell (PH 274). The area of a safe clearing spell is immobile. Any creature attempting to strike or otherwise directly attack anyone within the safe clearing, or any creature attempting to enter the area, must make a Will save. Success means the creature can act normally and is not affected by this casting of the spell. Failure means it can’t attack anyone in the area or even enter the area for the duration of the spell. Those not attempting to attack creatures in the warded area remain unaffected. This spell does not prevent creatures in the warded area from being attacked or affected by area spells. A creature within the area that makes an attack is no longer protected by the spell, and can be targeted normally.  SAFETY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level  The recipient of this spell can ﬁnd the shortest, most direct direction to a place of safety, with safety being deﬁned as a location where the individual is not taking immediate damage from the environment, and immediate damage is not imminent. It does not provide the means for the subject to move in that direction. A safety spell points out the shortest distance out of a poisonous cloud, or the direction one should dig to reach the surface if entombed in earth. It does not function against the maze spell, because that spell deals no physical damage. Nor does the spell provide knowledge of or protection against the creatures that inhabit those safe places. In the D&D cosmology (DMG 150), safety has the following effects when cast on speciﬁc planes. Plane of Shadow: Shortest route out of darklands. Elemental Plane of Air: Nearest windproof shelter, shortest route out of smoke bank. Elemental Plane of Earth: Nearest air pocket or open cavern. Elemental Plane of Fire: Shortest route out of magma pools or other unusually hot places. Elemental Plane of Water: Nearest pocket of breathable air; shortest route out of hot spot, ice pocket, or red tide. Negative Energy Plane: Nearest doldrum area with the minor negative-dominant trait. Positive Energy Plane: Nearest edge zone with the minor positive-dominant trait. Limbo: Nearest area of stabilized limbo. Pandemonium: Nearest shelter from a windstorm. Carceri: Shortest route out of a Minethys sandstorm. Gehenna: Nearest ﬂat ledge, nearest shelter from Mungoth’s acidic snow.  CHAPTER 1  Abjuration Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  After an intonation and clasping of the subjectcreature,yougrantitknowledgeof where safety lies.  Nine Hells: Nearest shelter from ﬁreballs on Avernus, rockslides on Malbolge, or cold on Cania. Acheron: Nearest shelter from Ocanthus bladestorms. On planes you create yourself, safety might provide other information. This spell is mostly used in hostile environments, such as one of the Inner Planes, to locate the nearest pocket of habitable space. If safety is cast and then followed by a plane shift spell (PH 262), the plane shift sends the subject of safety to a place of relative safety on that plane. It is transported to a pocket of air on the Elemental Plane of Water, for example, or a cool spot on the Elemental Plane of Fire.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  SAFE CLEARING  Saving Throw: None or Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No or Yes (harmless)  SALTRAY  Evocation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes A thin shaft of whirling salt crystals lances out from your crooked ﬁnger to strike and shred your foe. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck by a saltray takes 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) and must make a Fortitude save or be stunned for 1 round.  SANCTUARY, MASS  Abjuration Level: Balance 5, cleric 5 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Youcastthisspellandyouareinfusedwith aclear,silveryaura.Youtoucheachofyour companions in turn, and they are infused with the aura as well. This spell functions like sanctuary (PH 274), except that it affects multiple creatures.  179  Illus.. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SANDBLAST  Evocation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Whipping your hand in a wide arc, you spray sand from your ﬁngers in a powerful blast.  SCALE WEAKENING Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  Creatures in the area take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. Any creature that fails its Reﬂex save is also stunned for 1 round. You are not harmed by the spell.  less than 0, nor does it have any effect on an enhancement bonus to natural armor (such as that granted by the barkskin spell). Material Component: A shed snakeskin.  SCATTERSPRAY  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: Six or more Diminutive or Fine objects, all within 1 ft. of each other, whose total weight does not exceed 25 lb. Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No With a single word and gesture, yousendsmall,unattendedobjects ﬂying about the room.  SARCOPHAGUS OF STONE  Conjuration (Creation) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: No The ground quakes as native stone erupts from the ground. This sharply rising stone takes the form of a sarcophagus. This spell creates an airtight stone cofﬁn that forms around the target. The stone is 1 inch thick, has hardness 8, and requires 15 points of damage to break through. Decreasing its size does not change the thickness of the walls; the cofﬁn is always just large enough to hold the subject. This cofﬁn is sealed upon formation and completely impervious to air and gas. A creature trapped within a sarcophagus of stone has 1 hour worth of air, and after that time must hold its breath or begin to suffocate (DMG 304). A creature that has no need to breathe (such as a construct, elemental, or undead) needs not fear suffocation, but it remains trapped within the sarcophagus until it breaks free or is freed. A creature within the cofﬁn can attack the stone with a natural weapon or light melee weapon. A creature can  180  attempt a DC 26 Strength check to break free of the stone, and allies can also help to break the trapped creature free. Material Component: A fragment of a sarcophagus.  Encasing a foe in a sarcophagus of stone proves an effective—albeit grisly—tactic  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes As you cast this spell, the snakeskin vaporizes. A dull gray ray projects from your hand.Wheretheraystrikes,yourfoe’sskin seems brittle and more frail. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The subject’s natural armor bonus is reduced by 1 point per three caster levels (maximum reduction 5 points at 15th level). This spell can’t reduce a creature’s natural armor bonus to  You can point to a collection of little, unsecured items and cause them to ﬂy off in all directions simultaneously. The spray of items creates a burst with a 10-foot radius. If the items are fairly hard or sharp (such as stones, sling bullets, coins, or the like), creatures in the burst take 1d8 points of damage. A successful Reﬂex save negates this damage. Eggs, fruit, and other soft objects can be used, but the damage then dealt is nonlethal damage.  SCENT  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) At your touch, the creature inhales deeply, experiencing anew world of sensory input. You give the creature touched the scent ability (MM 314).  Material Component: A sprinkle of mustard and pepper.  SCINTILLATING SCALES  This spell transforms your natural armor bonus to Armor Class into a deﬂection bonus to your Armor Class. While your overall Armor Class might not change, the deﬂection bonus applies to melee touch attacks and ranged touch attacks, including incorporeal touch attacks. If you have no natural armor bonus, this spell has no effect.  SCINTILLATING SPHERE  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Youpinchthemarblebetweenyourﬁngers and intone the spell. It ﬂies from your ﬁngers,trailingasmellofozone,andgrows intoaballofmulticoloredsparksthatdetonate in a burst of spherical lightning. A scintillating sphere is a massive electrical discharge that deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to every creature and unattended object within the area. Material Component: A glass marble.  SCORCH  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft.  Scorch deals 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels, to a maximum of 5d8 points of damage, to each target it hits. Focus: A red dragon’s scale.  SCOURGE  Necromancy Level: Pestilence 7 Components: V, S, F, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Targets: One living creature/level, no two of which are more than 50 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Picking out those you wish revenge upon, you cause their bodies to erupt in painful and debilitating blackened boils, magenta blotches,violetlesions,seepingabscesses,and malignant cysts. The target creatures are infected with a vile disease unless they succeed on a Fortitude save. Once it has infected a creature, the disease immediately deals 1d6 points of Strength and Dexterity damage, and it deals the same damage each subsequent day. A creature is allowed an additional saving throw each day to avoid that day’s damage. As with mummy rot (DMG 292), successful saves do not allow the creature to recover. The symptoms persist until the creature ﬁnds some magical means to remove the disease. The disease can be removed by ﬁrst casting break enchantment or remove curse on the subject (requiring a DC 20 caster level check for either spell), after which a remove disease, heal, or similar spell will cure the victim. Focus: A black whip or riding crop, which is cracked in the direction of the intended victims during the casting of the spell.  Transmutation [Chaotic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None (for portal) Spell Resistance: No You raise your hand and send a roiling ball of crackling, multicolored energy at the portal, knowing its chaotic power will give portal users a surprise.  You randomize the destination of one interplanar gate or portal for the duration of the spell. Anyone who passes through the portal from either side is sent to a random plane instead of the portal’s normal destination. All those who fail the save on the same round go to the same location on the same plane. Material Component: A cracked mirror.  CHAPTER 1  Youinvokethewordsofthisspell,andyour skin glistens and shimmers with a silvery protective aura that makes you shine.  A jet of roaring ﬂame bursts from your outstretchedhand,scorchinganycreature in its path.  SCRAMBLE PORTAL  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  Area: 30-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SEAL PORTAL  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: Permanent (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You cast a silver bar in the direction of the portal and it vanishes, becoming a semitranslucent net of silver magic that brieﬂy encases the portal before disappearing. You can permanently seal an interplanar gate or portal. The spell prevents any use of the portal, although seal portal can be dispelled by a dispel magic spell. A knock spell does not function on a sealed portal, but a chime of opening dispels seal portal if seal portal was cast by a spellcaster of lower than 15th level. Once a portal is opened, seal portal does not remain in effect and must be cast again. Material Component: A silver bar worth 50 gp.  181  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SECOND WIND  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous and 1 hour/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youfeelslightlywindedbutenergized,asif having just run a long distance but knowing you could run farther. When touching thespell’sintendedrecipient,yourbreathing returns to normal but you note the spell’s subject heaves a deep, refreshing breath. This spell removes fatigue from a subject and provides a +4 bonus on Constitution checks for the duration of the spell. If the subject creature is exhausted when you cast this spell, its condition is improved to fatigued.  SEEK ETERNAL REST  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level You invoke the greater powers and are infusedwithagreat,goldenglow,empowering you with holy glory. You improve your ability to turn undead. For the purpose of turning or destroying undead, you are treated as a cleric of your paladin level.  SENSE HERETIC  Divination Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Object touched Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  182  Holding the target item aloft, you quietly chant the last few words to cast the spell. Theitemimmediatelyﬂaresasoftbluecolor, which fades almost immediately.  This spell is usually cast on a weapon or a holy symbol. If an evil creature that has the ability to cast divine spells comes within 100 feet of the item, the item begins to glow with a faint blue radiance. You cannot tell where, or in which direction, the detected creature is, only that such a creature is within range. The spell can penetrate barriers, but 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt blocks it.  SENSORY DEPRIVATION  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief Spell Resistance: Yes Yourvisionblurs,andsoundsseemmufﬂed as you cast the spell. Upon completing it, you release the spell’s energy, freeing your senses from that which dampened them. Thetargetofyourspellglowsforaninstant with a black aura. Rather than creating an illusion of something, this spell creates an illusion of absolute nothingness. The spell effect surrounds the subject in a dark, clinging shadow that only it perceives, which blocks all auditory, olfactory, taste, and visual sensations. In addition, it blocks ﬁnely tuned senses of touch such as those that provide a creature with tremorsense. A subject that fails its save is blinded and deafened, and it gains no beneﬁt from blindsense, blindsight, scent, or tremorsense. The subject retains any telepathic or empathic links it might possess with other creatures while affected by the spell. Material Component: Black silk cloth tied like a blindfold.  SERENE VISAGE  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  By casting this spell, you imbue yourself with an ephemeral quality that induces others to trust what you say. Simple illusions aid your attempts to be persuasive. You gain an insight bonus equal to one-half your caster level (maximum +10) on Bluff checks.  SERVANT HORDE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Invisible, mindless, shapeless servants Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you complete this spell, you sense a number of invisible entities form around you. This spell creates a number of unseen servants (PH 297) equal to 2d6 +1 per level (maximum +15). Material Component: A small stick to which many lengths of knotted thread are attached.  SHADOW BINDING  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 10-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes As the links of chain in your hand dissipate to feed the arcane energies of your spell, a multitudeofribbonlikeshadowsinstantaneouslyexplodesoutwardfromanindicated point nearby. Creatures in the area that fail a Will save are entangled and unable to move. Breaking free of a shadow binding requires a DC 20 Strength check or a DC 20 Escape Artist check, taken as a full-round action. Material Component: A few links of iron chain.  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Area: 1-ft.-diameter circle Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: No Spell Resistance: No With a ﬂourish, you open an invisible portal. Plunging your arm inside, you see your hand vanish as though it were invisible. You can temporarily stash small items on the Plane of Shadow (DMG 152) or permanently dispose of them there. This spell opens a small portal to the Plane of Shadow that is invisible on the Material Plane and appears as a small disk on the Plane of Shadow. You can reach into the Plane of Shadow through the portal created by shadow cache, but only small, nonliving objects can pass entirely through the hole. The cache can hold up to 30 cubic feet of material, or 250 pounds. You can recover objects placed in the portal throughout the duration of the spell, or by casting another shadow cache  later. A shadow cache remains stationary at the point where you create it. Items placed in a shadow cache can possibly be picked up by natives of the Plane of Shadow, and in any event are slowly moved by the morphic trait of the plane. For every 24 hours that passes, there is a 10% chance each day that objects placed on the Plane of Shadow with shadow cache are gone (either moved or taken). The spell cannot be cast on the Plane of Shadow itself, but only on planes coexistent with the Plane of Shadow.  SHADOW FORM  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Assassin 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Shadows rise from the ground to envelop you. The shadows easily move with you, guiding your steps and how to hold your body. While this spell is in effect, you gain a number of beneﬁts. The shadows wrapping your form grant you a +4  SHADOW HAND  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Medium shadowy hand Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  SHADOW CACHE  Illus. by L. Parillo  Shadow binding only entraps the weak-willed  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  competence bonus on Escape Artist, Hide, and Move Silently checks. Your shadowy form also provides you with concealment. This shadowy concealment is not negated by a see invisibility spell, but a true seeing spell counteracts the effect. Standing within the radius of a daylight spell or in bright natural sunlight temporarily suppresses the concealment effect. In addition, if you have 5 ranks in Escape Artist, you can attempt to slip through a solid object or barrier up to 5 feet thick with a DC 20 Escape Artist check, though doing this ends the spell as soon as the attempt is completed (regardless of success). If you have 10 ranks in Escape Artist, you can attempt to pass through an object or barrier up to 10 feet thick. If you have 15 ranks in Escape Artist, you can attempt to pass through a barrier composed of magical force (or similar magical obstacles). Material Component: A small piece of black cloth taken from a funeral shroud.  You intone the spell, and an enormous hand made out of thick gray fog ﬂoats in the air before you. You create a ﬂoating Medium hand made of shadow material. A shadow hand is an opaque gray color, 5 feet long, and 5 feet wide with its ﬁngers outstretched. It can grant total concealment against a single opponent you designate, carry materials as Tenser’s ﬂoating disk (PH 294), or point or gesture as a normal hand does. The hand has an AC of 18 (+6 natural, +2 deﬂection) and has half as many hit points as your full normal total. It can be damaged just as Bigby’s interposing hand (PH 204) can be, and it makes all saving throws as if it were you. Changing the hand’s task or target is a standard action, and it can move anywhere in range. If not given any  183  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The shadow landscape spell brings a bit of the Plane of Shadow to the Material Plane  commands, the hand follows you at your speed, maintaining the same distance from you. The spell ends if the hand moves out of the spell’s range. If carrying items and commanded to do something else, the hand drops whatever it is holding to complete its task (you can order the hand to rid itself of items gently as a standard action). Unlike Tenser’s ﬂoating disk, it does not have to follow you at a ﬁxed distance—you direct where the hand goes.  SHADOW LANDSCAPE  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: One-mile-radius spread centered on a point in space Duration: 24 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  184  By infusing the nearby landscape with power stolen from the Plane of Shadow, you make the surrounding terrain a more savage, dangerous place. The spell’s exact effects vary with the terrain upon which it is cast. Desert: The spell transforms a desert into a place where no one goes willingly. The average temperature increases by 30 degrees, or decreases by 30 degrees if the desert is actually a tundra (see Cold Dangers and Heat Dangers, DMG 302–303). Sandstorms (or snowstorms if in a tundra) blow through a shadow landscape desert on an hourly basis. Forest: Forests augmented with a shadow landscape spell become frightening places where a canopy of rotting leaves blocks the sun and all the trees are strangely twisted. Spaces with light undergrowth have heavy undergrowth instead, and spaces covered with heavy undergrowth grasp at passersby as if an entangle spell (PH 227) had been cast on them (save DC equal to the shadow landscape’s DC).  Hill: Even gentle hills become more treacherous under the effect of a shadow landscape spell. Light undergrowth becomes heavy undergrowth in hill terrain, and slopes seem steeper than their elevation would indicate. It takes 2 squares of movement to move uphill on a gradual slope, and 4 squares to move uphill on a steep slope. Cliffs have frequent overhangs and are made of crumbling rock, requiring a DC 25 Climb check to ascend or descend. Marsh: Marshes seem swampier and more forbidding. Half the undergrowth spaces in the marsh become quicksand (DMG 88). Mountain: The mountains become places of jagged peaks, slippery slopes, and howling winds. Cliffs and chasms require a DC 25 Climb check to scale. Creatures who fail Climb checks or make loud noises have a 10% chance of starting an avalanche (DMG 90). Altitude effects are one category worse: areas lower than 5,000 feet are treated as the 5,000- to 15,000-foot category, and anything above 5,000 feet is treated as being above 15,000 feet.  Transmutation Level: Assassin 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourhandbecomesslightlytranslucentas youcompletethearcanegesturesofthespell. As you touch the intended recipient, your handappearssolidagain,whilethesubject’s ﬂesh takes on a dark, wispy, insubstantial appearance. The spell temporarily transposes some of the subject’s tissue with shadow-stuff, making the subject partially incorporeal. This partially incorporeal state does not allow the subject to pass through walls or other solid objects. Nonmagical physical attacks directed against the spell’s subject suffer a 50% miss chance. Magical attacks, such as supernatural and spell-like abilities, spells, and magic weapons, suffer a 20% miss chance.  SHADOW MASK  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) You draw raw energy from the Plane of Shadow to obscure your face. You cause a mask of shadows to form around your face. It does not impede your vision, cannot be physically removed, completely hides your features, and protects you against certain attacks. You receive a +4 bonus on saving throws against light or darkness spells and any spells that rely on bright light for damaging effects, such as the ﬂare spell or the ﬁreworks effect of pyrotechnics. You also gain a 50% chance each round to avoid having to make a saving throw against gaze attacks, just as if you averted your  eyes. If you avert your eyes while using shadow mask, you get to check twice to see if you avoid having to make the saving throw. When the spell’s duration ends, the shadow mask fades over the course of 1d4 rounds (rather than immediately), giving you time to keep your face hidden by other means. A successful dispel magic cast against a shadow mask effectively ends the spell and causes the same slow fading. Material Component: A mask of black cloth.  SHADOW RADIANCE  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  In addition to terrain-speciﬁc effects, a shadow landscape spell worsens the weather within the spell’s area. When rolling random weather (DMG 94), roll twice and take the higher result. In plains terrain, roll three times and take the highest result. This effect does not apply underground. You don’t suffer the terrain-speciﬁc effects (entangling terrain, hindrances to movement, altitude effects, higher Climb DCs, and so on) of a shadow landscape you created. When you cast shadow landscape, you can designate one creature per four caster levels as a designated traveler. Creatures so designated don’t suffer the terrain-speciﬁc effects of the spell, but they’re still subject to the bad weather. You can also designate one or more animals, plants, or magical beasts native to the spell’s area as shadow guardians of the landscape. You can designate 1 HD of creature per caster level, split up however you like. For example, a 20th-level druid could designate two treants (7 HD each) and a dire wolf (6 HD) as shadow guardians. As long as the designated guardians remain within the spell’s area, they have a friendly attitude toward you and the travelers you have designated, and they also gain the following special qualities: resistance to cold 10, darkvision out to 60 feet, damage reduction 5/magic, evasion, and lowlight vision. If the creature already has one or more of these special qualities, use the better value.  SHADOW PHASE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Plain: Only natural grasslands change as a result of shadow landscape, but they become wide-open spaces with stands of thick bushes where thunderstorms and tornados are frequent. Half the spaces with undergrowth (light or heavy) grasp at passersby as if an entangle spell (PH 227) had been cast on them (save DC equal to the shadow landscape’s DC). Underground: Ordinary dungeons aren’t affected by shadow landscape, but naturally occurring caverns are. Natural stone ﬂoors take 4 squares of movement per space to enter. Stalagmites cover 10% of the available ﬂoor space.  Whisperingtheﬁnalsyllableofthecomplicatedformula,youcastthespell.Instantly, a blast of bright light ﬁlls the targeted area. From your vantage point, the spell’s light glows like a torch, although you note some creatures turn away from it as if it were a blinding radiance. This spell creates an intensifying illusion of bright light that affects all creatures within the area (except those that are sightless or blinded). Viewers that fail their saving throws see a burst of bright light on the ﬁrst round and become blinded for 1 round. On subsequent rounds for the rest of the spell’s duration, the affected creatures continue to perceive a bright light. If they take penalties in bright illumination, they take them for the duration of their exposure to this light. Additionally, they are dazzled while in the area of the spell. Those who escape the area of a shadow radiance spell completely recover within 1 round. Those who make their saves and those outside the initial burst see only the equivalent of torchlight emanating from the center of the area. Material Component: A ﬂame at least the size of a torch.  185  SHADOW SPRAY  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 5-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes As you ﬁnish casting this spell, ribbonlike shadows burst outward from the midst of your foes. You cause a multitude of ribbonlike shadows to instantaneously explode outward from the point of origin. Creatures in the area take 4 points of Strength damage and are dazed for 1 round. Material Component: A handful of black ribbons.  SHADOW WELL  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You spit out the words of the spell, and the shadowofyourfoedarkens,becomingasolid blackpit.Youropponentpinwheelsitsarms as it topples backward into the darkness. You cause the target’s shadow to become a temporary gateway to a pocket realm within the Plane of Shadow. The target must make a Will save or be pulled into the gateway. Inside the pocket realm, the creature sees a deserted, gloomy duplicate of the real world, while shadowy phantasms stalk and taunt it without causing actual harm. Each round, the creature can attempt another Will save to return from the shadow well. Otherwise, the subject returns to the real world when the spell’s duration expires. Being trapped in a shadow well can be terrifying; upon returning to the real world, the subject must succeed on another Will save or be frightened for 1d4 rounds.  186  Upon leaving the pocket realm, the subject reappears in the spot it had been in when the shadow well spell was cast. If this spot is ﬁlled with a solid object, the subject appears in the nearest adjacent empty space. Spells and abilities that move a creature within a plane, such as teleport and dimension door, do not help a creature escape a shadow well spell, although a plane shift spell allows it to ﬂee to another plane as normal. The target might still become frightened upon leaving.  SHADOWBLAST  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 4, druid 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Lightﬂashesbrightandwhiteforaninstant in the area of this spell, dispersing portals to the Plane of Shadow and stunning the unnatural creatures that fear the light. Natives of the Plane of Shadow caught in a shadowblast are stunned for 1d6 rounds if they fail a Fortitude saving throw. Shadow natives that are also undead or vulnerable to light take an additional 2d10 points of damage if they fail a second Fortitude save. Creatures that fail either Fortitude save cannot use spell-like or supernatural abilities to open any portal to the Plane of Shadow for 3d6 minutes. Shadowblast closes all portals, gates, and other openings to the Plane of Shadow in its area. Creatures on the other side of a portal are unaffected by shadowblast. Material Component: A handful of grave dirt, squeezed tightly and ﬂung.  SHADOWFADE  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One 10-ft. portal to the Plane of Shadow Duration: 1 minute/level  Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Summoningtomindadarkreﬂectionofthe world around you, you inscribe a doorway into the air with your hand, opening a portal to the Plane of Shadow. You open a 10-foot-diameter portal onto the Plane of Shadow, allowing you and creatures you designate within range to pass into that area. This does not grant you the ability to open another such portal automatically, so the spell is often used as a temporary hiding place or a method of gaining access to the Plane of Shadow. The portal remains for the duration of the spell, and other creatures can pass through it in either direction if they make a Will save. The portal is invisible from the Material Plane and looks like a white hole on the Plane of Shadow. You must be in a region of heavy shadows to cast shadowfade. The spell can be cast only on a plane coexistent with the Plane of Shadow (DMG 152), and it cannot be cast on the Plane of Shadow itself.  SHADOWY GRAPPLER  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youfeelaspectralforceformnearyou,asif someintangibleshadowbeingstoodnearby. Uponchoosingthetargetofyourspell,you sense the shadowy force depart from your side, moving as fast as thought toward the creatureyoudesignatedasyourtarget.You see the target creature move as if attacked by an unseen foe. Upon casting this spell, you create a shadowy force that automatically grabs the target (PH 156). The shadowy force immediately attempts to establish a hold on the target with a grapple check bonus equal to the DC of this spell. If the target succeeds on its saving throw, the grapple check bonus of the shadowy grappler is cut in half. For example, a sorcerer with a 16 Charisma who casts  radius. A successful Reﬂex save halves the damage. Each round at the beginning of your turn, creatures in the area take an additional 3d6 points of force damage. You can use a free action to suppress the storm for that round. Material Component: A small shard of clear glass or crystal.  Immediately upon completion of this spell, and once per round thereafter, you can cause minuscule shards of magical force to explode out in a 20foot-radius burst from the point of origin. The storm deals 3d6 points of force damage to all creatures within the  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You cast this spell, and your jaws glow with yellow, eldritch power, your muscles grow more powerful,andyourteeth become sharper.  Shard storm harms corporeal and incorporeal foes alike  SHARE HUSK  Divination Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by R. Horsley  Tossingtheshardfromyourgrasp,youcomplete the spell. An instant later, translucent shards of arcane energy blast the area you designated. In addition to deadly shards, the area ﬁlls with the chiming sound of shattering glass.  You sense through an animal’s senses, seeing through its eyes and hearing through its ears. While doing so, you use either your Listen or Spot modiﬁers or the animal’s, whichever is better. This spell gives you no special ability to understand what you sense. You can switch your perceptions between the animal’s and your own on your turn as a free action. You and the animal must be on the same plane for the spell to function. Material Component: An edible treat that would appeal to the animal (vegetable or meat).  SHARPTOOTH  SHARD STORM Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./ level) Effect: One or more 20-ft.-radius bursts of piercing force Duration: 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  As the bit of dried food vanishes from your hand, you gain a wolf’s-eye view of the world—and a wolf’s-nose view as well.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  this spell creates a shadowy grappler with a grapple check bonus of +19 if the target fails its save and +9 if the target makes its save. Every round on your turn, the shadowy grappler makes a grapple check against the target. Once it has a hold, the shadowy force attempts to pin the target on the following round. If the grappler establishes a pin, it uses the option to prevent the target from speaking. The grappler always attempts to maintain a grapple or work toward a pin. A shadowy grappler occupies the same square as the target and moves with the target for as long as the spell lasts. Other creatures cannot join the grapple, either to assist the target or the grappler. Material Component: A dried squid tentacle.  Choose one of your natural weapons (or your unarmed strike if you have no natural weapons). For the duration of the spell, that method of attack deals damage as though you were one size category larger than your actual size. This spell does not stack with itself.  SHATTERFLOOR  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 15-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  187  Illus. by D. Martin  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  188  You strike the bell with the hammer and evoke a loud thrumming vibration. It quickly builds to a painful crescendo, then fades.Initswakeitleavesacircleofcrushed stone and rubble.  You hold your arms aloft and implore the power you venerate. Your comrades are bathedinasilverlight,andovertheirhearts appearsthesymbolofyourgod,showingthe deity’s protection.  Creatures and objects in the area take 1d4 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d4), and can make a saving throw to take half damage. If the ﬂoor of the area is made of stone, wood, ice, or material with hardness less than those, the ﬂoor is pulverized, resulting in an area of difﬁcult terrain composed of soft dust, wood fragments, or loose crushed ice, as appropriate. Focus: A miniature hammer and bell worth at least 10 gp.  This spell functions like shield of faith (PH 278), except that it affects multiple allies at a distance.  SHELTERED VITALITY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 4, druid 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The touched shield or buckler grants its wielder a +1 sacred bonus to Armor Class and on Reﬂex saves, +1 per ﬁve caster levels (maximum +5 at 20th level). The bonus applies only when the shield is worn or carried normally (but not, for instance, if it is slung over the shoulder).  SHIELDBEARER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Shield touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Afeelingofprotectivenessand guardianship ﬁlls you as you complete the spell. Touching the target shield, you point to the creature it is meant to protect and watch as the shield rises intheairandﬂoats gently toward the indicated creature.  A shieldbearer spell allows you to enchant one shield so that it hovers near and attempts to protect one creature of your choice. The spell’s recipient is chosen at the time of casting and cannot be changed. The enchanted shield remains within 1 foot of the creature The shieldbearer spell can prove better than the shield spell for the duration of the spell. Pressing your hand to the The shield’s subject is then granted a creature’s chest, you utter a low chant, and SHIELD OF WARDING shield bonus to AC as if it was wearAbjuration [Good] a warm glow passes from your hand into ing the shield. The spell permits the the subject. Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 enchanted shield’s subject to use a Components: V, S two-handed weapon or a weapon in The subject gains immunity to fatigue, Casting Time: 1 standard action each hand and still beneﬁt from the exhaustion, and ability damage or abilRange: Touch shield’s effect. ity drain (regardless of the source). Target: One shield or buckler Shield bonuses from multiple touched sources, including multiple castings Duration: 1 minute/level SHIELD OF FAITH, of this spell, do not stack. Saving Throw: Will negates (object, MASS harmless) Abjuration SHIFTING PATHS Spell Resistance: No Illusion (Glamer) Level: Cleric 4 You press your palm against the shield and Level: Druid 7, sorcerer/wizard 8 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) speakthewordsofpower.Asilverradiance, Components: V, S Targets: One creature/level, no two in the shape of your holy symbol spreads Casting Time: 10 minutes of which are more than 30 ft. apart over the shield. Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 1-mile radius + 1 mile/level  Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: Yes  SHOCK AND AWE  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Assassin 1, bard 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart. Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Upon completing this spell, you feel a nagging compulsion to divert your attention from your enemies. Shaking off the feeling, you note with satisfaction that your targetedenemiesseemevenmoredistracted than you. This spell distracts its targets, preventing them from reacting with the deftness they might otherwise possess. Only effective when cast in the surprise round of combat and against  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Yousnapyourﬁngers,andasmallexplosion ofblacksmokeresults.Nearby,oneofyour foes bursts into ﬂames. This spell causes a creature to take 2d6 points of ﬁre damage in each round of the spell’s duration. The shroud of ﬂame around the creature sheds bright illumination out to 40 feet and negates any concealment the creature might have. Immersing the subject creature in a nonﬂammable liquid ends the spell. Material Component: A pinch of saltpeter, a small piece of phosphorus, and a scrap of lace cloth or a spiderweb.  SHROUD OF UNDEATH Necromancy Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  You are bathed with a dappled white light. Whereitstrikesyourbody,yourﬂeshgrows momentarilypaleandancient,thenreturns to normal. You shroud yourself with invisible negative energy so that nonintelligent undead creatures perceive you as a fellow undead, ignoring you. Your appearance does not change, and while intelligent undead do not immediately recognize you as alive, they are likely to question whether you are actually undead. If used in conjunction with a disguise or illusion to appear undead,  CHAPTER 1  This spell simultaneously hides a path or road speciﬁed by you, while simultaneously creating an illusory path. The illusory path starts at a point chosen by you within the range of the spell. It continues in the direction you indicate, to the limit of the spell’s area, where it ends abruptly. The illusory path avoids obstacles and provides no bridges, stairs, ladders, ramps, or other methods of traversing such obstacles. There is no way to force the illusory path to lead over a cliff or across a river more than 4 feet deep. Those who fail their Will saves struggle along the illusory path. If vegetation or rough terrain slows their progress, they believe the path is sloping enough to justify the reduced speed. Those who succeed on their Will saves see both paths, but the illusory path is shadowy and obviously unreal.  SHROUD OF FLAME  this spell gives you a +5 bonus on your Disguise check. When you are affected by this spell, inﬂict spells heal you and cure spells hurt you. You are treated as if you were undead for the purpose of all spells and effects that speciﬁcally affect undead creatures. A successful turning or rebuking attempt against you (treating you as an undead of your Hit Dice) ends this spell but does not otherwise affect you. If you attack an undead creature while this spell is in effect, the spell immediately ends. Material Component: Dust or bone fragments from any destroyed undead creature.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  As if a massive cloth were sweeping it away, the path before you becomes hidden in shadows and false underbrush. At the same moment, a new path appears from the point you designate, wandering off in a different direction.  ﬂat-footed creatures, this spell causes those it affects to take a –10 penalty on their next initiative check. Targets that cannot be caught ﬂat-footed (such as a rogue with uncanny dodge) cannot be affected by this spell.  SIGN  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged The tea leaves burst into ﬂames between yourﬁngers,andforabriefmomentyousee the future in the billowing smoke. You get a +4 bonus on your next initiative check. Material Component: A small piece of dried goat intestine or some tea leaves.  SIGN OF SEALING  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One door, chest, or other opening up to 30 sq. ft./level Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: No While pointing at the target, you trace the lines of a complicated sigil that visually appears where it is to seal. The sigil glows with latent magical energy. You seal a door, chest, or similar closure with a prominent magical sigil that  189  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  bars entry and prevents opening. A door or object protected by this spell can be opened only by breaking (add 10 to the normal break DC) or by the use of knock or dispel magic. If the door or object is forced open by any means (magical or physical), the sign of sealing deals 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d4) in a 30-foot radius (Reﬂex half). A knock spell doesn’t negate or automatically bypass a sign of sealing, but will suppress the sign for 10 minutes on a successful caster level check (DC 11 + the caster level of the sign’s creator). A sign of sealing is a magic trap that can be disarmed with a DC 28 Disable Device check. You can pass your own sign safely, and it remains set behind you. Material Component: A crushed emerald worth 100 gp.  SILENT PORTAL  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One portal  In the case of magic or even intelligent portals, spell resistance and a Will save (DC 10 + caster’s ability modiﬁer + other modiﬁers as appropriate) apply.  SILVERBEARD  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You evokethegreater powers of good, and your beard stiffens, turning metallic and reachinghalfwaydownyour chest, giving you greater protection. Your beard grows and turns to pure and magically hardened silver, providing you with a +2 sacred bonus to AC. If you do not have a beard, you grow one for the duration of this spell (even if you are a creature that cannot normally grow a beard, such as an elf or a female human). You get a +2 circumstance bonus on Diplomacy checks against dwarves.  SIGN OF SEALING, GREATER  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Casting Time: 10 minutes Target: One door, chest, or other opening or open space up to 30 sq. ft./level This spell functions like sign of sealing, except that it can also be used to seal an open space (such as a corridor or an archway), creating a magical barrier of force that repels any creature attempting to pass. In addition, doors and objects protected by a greater sign of sealing are strengthened, increasing their hardness by 10 and granting them an extra 5 hit points per caster level. Any object protected by a greater sign of sealing is treated as a magic item for the purpose of making saving throws and gains a +4 resistance bonus on saving throws. If its seal is broken, a greater sign of sealing deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6) in a 40-foot radius (Reﬂex half). A greater sign of sealing cannot be passed with a knock spell, but it can be dispelled (DC 15 + the caster level of  190  the sign’s creator). It can be disarmed with a DC 31 Disable Device check. Material Component: A crushed emerald worth at least 500 gp.  The sink spell defeats even the best swimmer  Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Thedoorsqueaksslightlyasyouforceit.You pause and wave your ﬁnger in a pattern along the opening and it silences. This simple cantrip negates the sound of opening and closing a single portal (door, window, gate, drawer, chest lid, or the like). Even the squeakiest door opens without a sound when under the effect of this spell. Silent portal covers only the normal means of opening and closing the targeted portal. Breaking a window or kicking in a door still makes noise, but opening a door that is loosely hanging by its hinges does not (since this is the normal way a door would be opened). Portals composed of magical energy are not affected by this spell.  SINK  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Casting this spell makes the water around the spell’s targets roil. Each target begins struggling against the water, as if trying hard merely to stay aﬂoat. When this spell is cast, it causes the targets, which must be currently in water or another liquid, to sink. Each subject descends 100 feet down into the liquid (or to the bottom, if the liquid is  not deep enough). Affected creatures can then swim up normally. Once on the bottom, a creature must still make a Swim check to move, or else it can move along the bottom at one-quarter its land speed.  SIRINE’S GRACE  For the duration of this spell, you gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Charisma and Dexterity, a deﬂection bonus to AC equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and a +8 bonus on Perform checks. You also gain a swim speed of 60 feet and the ability to breathe water. You can move and attack normally while underwater, even with slashing or bludgeoning weapons. Material Component: A shard of mirror.  SKELETAL GUARD  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One or more ﬁngerbones Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Shaking the ﬁngerbones in your hand like dice,youcoattheminshadowyenergy.As youcastthemtothegroundtocompletethe spell, animate skeletons spring up where you threw the bones. You create a number of loyal skeletons from ﬁngerbones. Treat all skeletons as human warrior skeletons (MM 226), except that each one has turn resistance equal to your caster level – 1. You can create one skeleton per caster level. These skeletons count toward the number of Hit Dice of undead you can  Necromancy Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One humanoid skull Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No You lift the skull into the air and it ﬂoats gentlyoutofyourgrasp,itseyesocketslocked on a distant point. The skull affected by a skull watch spell ﬂoats gently 5 feet off the ground, facing a direction you choose. It monitors an area 20 feet wide by 90 feet long, though walls and other opaque barriers can curtail this area. If any Tiny or larger living creature enters the area guarded by the skull, it emits a piercing shriek that can be heard up to a quarter mile away. Every creature within 60 feet of the skull when it shrieks must make a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1d6 rounds. Whether or not you can hear this audible alarm, you instantly become aware that the effect has been triggered, provided you are on the same plane as it is. The alarm resets 1d4 rounds later. When you cast the spell, you can specify creatures that will not trigger the alarm. The skull can be moved from its original position by anyone who can get to it without entering its monitored area. The skull has AC 12, hardness 1, and 1 hit point per caster level. You are not magically made aware of the skull’s destruction if it has not been triggered. Focus: The humanoid skull upon which the spell is cast.  SLAPPING HAND  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)  You complete the spell and blow into the leather glove. Immediately a blue-white, translucent hand appears next to the enemy and smacks it across the side of the head—not enough to hurt it, but hard enough to give others nearby a chance to attack. This spell distracts the subject, causing it to immediately provoke attacks of opportunity from creatures threatening its space. The spell allows no saving throw, but a slapped creature can negate the effect with a DC 20 Concentration check. Focus: A leather glove.  CHAPTER 1  Upon completion of this spell, you are infused with unearthly grace and conﬁdence.  SKULL WATCH  Effect: One Tiny hand Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation Level: Bard 4, druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  have in your control (4 HD per caster level, as with animate dead). Material Component: One ﬁnger bone from a humanoid and one onyx gem worth 50 gp per skeleton to be created.  SLASHING DARKNESS  Evocation Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You complete this spell and a hissing, hurtlingribbonofpuredarknessﬂiesfrom your hand. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck by this ray of negative energy takes 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8). An undead creature instead heals 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8).  SLIDE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Whenyouspeakthewordthatactivatesthe spell,thesolesofyourally’sfeetglowyellow  191  Illus. by E. Polak  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Green slime from a slime wave spell devours everything but stone  asheisliftedslightlyofftheground.Heslips ﬁve feet across the ground, into position to ﬂank his opponent. You slide the subject creature along the ground a distance of 5 feet in any direction. (If the creature is ﬂying or otherwise not on the ground, it moves parallel to the ground.) You can’t slide the subject into a space that is occupied by an ally, an enemy, or a solid object; if you attempt to do so, the spell automatically ends. You cannot slide the subject up or down, but you can slide it over the edge of a cliff or other drop-off if you desire. This movement does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  SLIDE, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) This spell functions like slide, except as described above, and you can slide the  192  subject creature 20 feet in a straight line. This movement likewise does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  SLIME WAVE  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Cleric 7, druid 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 15-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: No Youﬁnishthespell,andahorrendouswave of green slime explodes outward from the spot where you point. You create a wave of green slime (DMG 76) that begins at the point of origin you choose and violently spreads to the limit of the area. The wave splashes and splatters as it passes; some slime clings to any wall or ceiling the wave touches. Green slime devours ﬂesh and  organic materials on contact, and even dissolves metal. Each creature in the area is covered with one patch of green slime. Unlike normal green slime, the slime created by this spell gradually evaporates, disappearing by the end of the duration. Material Component: A few drops of stagnant pond water.  SLOW BURN  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 minute Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The desire to live into old age grips you as younearcompletionofthisspell.Thefeeling passesasyoudesignatetheareaofthespell, wheretheﬂamesthereﬂickerforamoment as if a gust of wind had hit them.  Transmutation Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your hand glows red brieﬂy upon casting this spell, and after you slap your foe on the back, you try to hide a grin. You bestow on your target an aroma that attracts predatory animals. They prefer to attack the subject over other targets, and animals attacking the subject creature gain a +1 bonus per three caster levels (maximum +3) on attack rolls and damage rolls.  SNAKE’S SWIFTNESS  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action  You toss the scales into the air, and they vanish in a sparkling mist as you indicate your target. Without hesitating, that creature draws and ﬁres an arrow into the fray. The subject can immediately make one melee or ranged attack. Taking this action doesn’t affect the subject’s normal place in the initiative order. This is a single attack and follows the standard rules for attacking. This spell does not allow the subject to make more than one additional attack in a round. If the subject has already made an additional attack, due to a prior casting of this spell, from the haste spell, or from any other source, this spell fails. Arcane Material Component: A few scales from a snake.  SNAKE’S SWIFTNESS, MASS  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allied creatures in a 20-ft.radius burst You hold the snake scales high overhead, and they evaporate in a ﬂash of light. That radiance carries to every ally in your command—and as one, they unleash a volley of attacks. This spell functions like snake’s swiftness, except that it affects multiple allies out to medium range.  SNAKEBITE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) You cast the spell, and one of your arms turns into a venomous bright-green snake  with a fanged, biting mouth that drips poison. This spell transforms one of your arms into a poisonous serpent. As an attack action, you can strike an opponent with your snake arm by making a successful melee attack. The bite from the venomous serpent deals damage equal to 1d3 points + your Str modiﬁer, and it carries a toxic venom that deals 2 points of Constitution damage as initial and secondary damage. Each instance of ability damage can be negated by a Fortitude save (DC equal to this spell’s DC). You can’t hold a weapon with your transformed hand, but your other hand can be used to wield weapons or cast spells with somatic components. Attacking with the transformed hand and a weapon incurs the standard twoweapon ﬁghting penalties (PH 160). You can be under the effect of only one snakebite spell at any given time.  CHAPTER 1  SMELL OF FEAR  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One allied creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell lends fuel to existing ﬁres within the spell’s area, allowing them to burn off the intangible power of passion as much as from physical substance. Because these ﬁres consume less of the physical fuel that sustain them, they burn for twice as long without losing any of their intensity, but their illumination radius is halved. In addition, an affected ﬁre is much harder to extinguish. It takes twice as long to put out a ﬁre that is under the effect of this spell, and if a roll is required (such as the Reﬂex save required to extinguish ﬂames if a creature is on ﬁre), two successful rolls over 2 rounds are required to successfully put out the ﬁre. If one such roll fails, the creature must begin trying to extinguish the ﬂames again as if it had never succeeded on the ﬁrst roll. Magical ﬁre used against a target in this spell’s area, such as from a produce ﬂame or ﬁreball spell, does not burn as effectively, and ﬁre damage from such sources is reduced by 1 point per die. Slow burn counters or dispels the effect of raging ﬂame (page 164). Arcane Material Component: An oilﬁlled hourglass.  SNIPER’S EYE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Holdingtheglasslensbeforeyou,youtake a series of slow, deep breaths. Whispered words of arcane power seep past your lips with each exhalation. As you complete the spell you feel infused with deadly ability. When you cast sniper’s eye, you gain the following beneﬁts. • +10 competence bonus on Spot checks. • Darkvision out to 60 feet. • The ability to make a ranged sneak attack at a range of up to 60 feet, rather than 30 feet. • The ability to make a death attack with a ranged weapon rather than just with a melee weapon. The target must be within 60 feet. This spell doesn’t grant you the ability to make a sneak attack or death attack if you don’t already have that ability. Sniper’s eye attunes you completely to the vantage point you had when  193  you cast the spell. You understand the nuances of the breeze and every angle and shadow—from that spot. If you move even 5 feet from the place where you cast the spell, you lose the beneﬁts of sniper’s eye until you return to that spot. Focus: A magnifying glass lens.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SNIPER’S SHOT  Divination Level: Assassin 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  Illus. by J. Engle  While muttering a short chant you focus your awareness, looking only at the areas of your foe that seem most vital to its survival. Your ranged attacks made before the start of your next turn can be sneak attacks regardless of the distance between you and your target. You must still fulﬁll the other conditions for making a sneak attack against the target. This spell doesn’t grant you the ability to make a sneak attack if you don’t already have that ability.  SNOWBALL SWARM  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  194  Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Asyoucastthisspell,thosearoundyousense an unnatural chill. This vanishes, though, asyoureleaseaburstoffrost-ﬁlledpowerin the midst of your foes. A ﬂurry of magic snowballs erupts from a point you select. The swarm of snowballs deals 2d6 points of cold damage to creatures and objects within the burst. For every two caster levels beyond 3rd, the snowballs deal an extra 1d6 points of damage, to a maximum of 5d6 at 9th level or higher. Material Component: A piece of ice or a small white rock chip.  SNOWSHOES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A chill grips you as you complete the spell and touch your intended subject. The feet of the spell’s subject glow with an ice-blue radiancethatfadesbutlingers.Thecreature risesslightlyoutofthesnow,asifitweighed much less.  The affected creature can walk lightly over ice and snow without having its speed reduced. The affected creature gains a 10-foot enhancement bonus to speed and is not required to make a Balance check or Reﬂex save to walk on ice and snow without slipping and falling, to avoid cracking ice it walks over, or to avoid falling through cracked ice. In addition, the affected creature does not leave a more readily discernible trail through ice and snow than it does on solid ground, denying trackers potential bonuses to follow the affected creature’s path. (See Weather, DMG 93–95, and Cold Dangers, DMG 302, for more details on the effects of weather and ice.)  SNOWSHOES, MASS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, ranger 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Thefeetofallthedesignatedcreaturesglow with an ice-blue aura. Each subject in turn rises slightly to the top of the snow, as if it were held aloft by the cold blue sheen. This spell functions like snowshoes, except as noted above.  SOLIPSISM  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)  The snowshoes spell gives a druid the upper hand when ﬁghting foes in the snow  Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Pangs of loneliness grip your heart as you complete the spell. Upon choosing your target,thefeelingsubsidesevenasaghostly pale yellow mist swirls around your target for a moment.  Transmutation Level: Bard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Performance +1 hour or until discharged; see text Youintonethissimplespellandyourcontrol over your voice improves, your unruly hair straightens, and your ﬂesh radiates a healthy glow. You’re ready for showtime. You acquire an even greater charisma when you perform. Anyone who hears or views your performance becomes favorably inclined toward you. This spell grants you a +1 competence bonus on your next Charisma-based check involving any one person who saw the performance. This effect lasts for the duration of your performance and up to 1 hour immediately following. You must begin the performance within 1 hour of casting the spell for it to have any effect.  SONIC BLAST  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1  You blast the target with loud and highpitched sounds. The subject takes 1d4 points of sonic damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d4) and must make a Will save or be deafened for 1d4 rounds. This spell has no effect if cast into the area of a silence spell.  SONIC RUMBLE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Your ﬁnal words of the spell become a deep, rumbling hum, as loud as the din of a battleﬁeld, and they blast outward from you in a cone. You create a cone of powerful sound. If used to attack, the cone deals 1d6 points of sonic damage per two levels (maximum 10d6) each round a creature is within the area; a successful Reﬂex save reduces this damage by half. Targets within the area of a silence spell are immune. Focus: A hollow cone of brass and gold worth 50 gp.  SONIC SNAP  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature or object Duration: Instantaneous  You bark the last word of the spell, and that wordtakeslife,streakingtowardyourtarget and exploding in a shout. You create a brief but loud noise adjacent to the target. The subject takes 1 point of sonic damage and must succeed on a Will saving throw or be deafened for 1 round. This spell has no effect if cast into the area of a silence spell.  SONIC WEAPON  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  CHAPTER 1  SONGBIRD  The words of your spell twist upon each other and grow stronger. Then, like a cluster of bees, they streak toward your target and detonate in a screaming bellow around him.  Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You manipulate the senses of one creature so that it perceives itself to be the only real creature in all of existence and everything around it to be merely an illusion. If the target fails its save, it is convinced of the unreality of every situation it might encounter. It takes no actions, not even purely mental actions, and instead watches the world around it with bemusement. The subject becomes effectively helpless and takes no steps to defend itself from any threat, since it considers any hostile action merely another illusion.  Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Holding the weapon to your mouth, you whisperthespell’sarcanewords,shrouding the weapon in visible sound like a thin sheen of water. While the spell is in effect, the affected weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of sonic damage with each successful attack. The sonic energy does not harm the weapon’s wielder. Bows, crossbows, and slings that are affected by this spell bestow the sonic energy upon their ammunition.  SONIC WHIP  Evocation [Sonic, Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A whip of force Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: No As you make a cracking sound and hold out your hand, the small silk whip within your grasp dissipates and a life-sized whip ofhissing blueforceappears inyourgrasp. Withexpertprecision,youmanagetomake the invisible whip in your hand crack. This spell creates a whip of sonic energy that you wield as if you had proﬁciency with it. Simply cracking a sonic whip  195  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  as a free action keeps normal animals (but not dire animals, magical beasts, or vermin) at bay unless they succeed on a Will save. Affected animals stay at least 30 feet away from you for the duration of the spell, as space permits. On a successful ranged attack with the whip, any normal animal you strike must succeed on a Will save or become frightened. Against other creature types, you can use a sonic whip in combat as if it were a normal whip. Material Component: A miniature silk whip.  SONOROUS HUM  Illus. by C. Dien  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 2, cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  196  You ﬁnish casting this spell, and the area around you is abuzz with a low, droning hum that improves your concentration. After you cast this spell, the next spell you cast within the duration that requires concentration to maintain is maintained for you until the sonorous hum spell expires. This effect allows you to cast other spells, even another spell that also requires concentration. If the spell maintained by the sonorous hum has a shorter duration than that of this spell, the maintained spell expires as it normally would, and you gain no further beneﬁts from this casting of sonorous hum. The sound created by the spell is as loud as a person in armor walking at a slow pace trying not to make noise (normally a DC 5 Listen check to detect). You can end the spell as a free action. For example, you could cast this spell, then cast detect thoughts, and this spell maintains the concentration on detect thoughts while you cast discern lies and maintain concentration on that spell yourself. You control all aspects of both spells, so you could change the orientation of the detect thoughts effect and select a different target for your discern lies spell in the same round.  A sound lance is visible as waves in the air  If you take damage, you must still make a Concentration check to maintain the spell.  SOUND LANCE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature or object Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes You unleash a shrill, piercing cry at your target, which takes the barely visible form  of a translucent lance hurtling through the air. This spell causes a projectile of intense sonic energy to leap from you to a target within range. The sound deals 1d8 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d8). A sound lance cannot penetrate the area of a silence spell.  SPARK OF LIFE  Necromancy Level: Cleric 3, druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Undead creature touched Duration: 1 round/level  Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Atouchfromyourhandoutlinesanundead creature in a faint yellow glow, making it vulnerable to many of the dangers that can harm living creatures.  Necromancy Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Hoping that your friend will not have need of the spell, you ensure that his death in the coming battle won’t result in an even greater abomination. The subject does not rise as an undead spawn should it perish from an undead’s attack that normally would  Transmutation [LanguageDependent] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Targets: Any number of allied creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart As you rub the small piece of copper wire, it begins to buzz with the latent magical energyofthespell.Whenyouﬁnallyrelease the spell’s energy, you hear the words you wish to share with your allies in your mind—and moments later you hear their unspoken replies. This spell functions like message (PH 253), except as noted above and that you and the recipients don’t have to mouth the words or whisper, which means that those skilled in reading lips have no opportunity to learn the messages.  SPECTRAL TOUCH  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level (D); see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes A touch from your hand, which crackles withblackenergy,weakensthelifeforceof living creatures. Each melee touch attack you successfully make during the spell’s duration channels negative energy that bestows one negative level on the target and grants you 5 temporary hit points. This  CHAPTER 1  SPAWN SCREEN  SPEAK TO ALLIES  spell cannot give you more temporary hit points than your normal starting hit points (your hit point total cannot exceed two times your normal starting hit points). Both the negative level and the temporary hit points last for up to 1 hour. You can use this attack once per round for a number of rounds equal to your caster level. Any charges of the spell not used by the time the duration expires are lost. An undead creature you touch instead gains 5 temporary hit points and you lose a like amount (no save). Temporary hit points gained in this way last for up to 1 hour.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  For the duration of the spell, the undead creature is subject to extra damage from critical hits (and thus sneak attacks), nonlethal damage, ability drain, energy drain, fatigue, exhaustion, and damage to its physical ability scores (though it still lacks a Constitution score and thus can’t take Constitution damage) as if it were alive. It loses its immunity to effects that require a Fortitude save, as well as its invulnerability to poison, sleep effects, paralysis, stunning, disease, and death effects. However, an undead affected by this spell gains a bonus on its Fortitude saves equal to its Charisma bonus (if any). (The bonus doesn’t apply to Fortitude saves against effects that also affect objects.) It must breathe, eat, and sleep just like a normal living creature (though the last two aren’t likely to come into play thanks to the spell’s short duration). While it is under the effect of this spell, both negative energy (such as inﬂict spells) and positive energy (such as cure spells) heal damage to the undead creature, rather than damaging it. An undead creature affected by this spell retains all of its other traits.  turn it into a spawn, such as from the bite of a ghoul (MM 118). This spell doesn’t prevent the subject from perishing or provide anything other than insurance that the subject’s body and spirit cannot be hijacked by an acquisitive undead creature. The protection applies if the duration is still in effect when the subject ﬁrst dies; the spell need not linger in its effect during the period immediately prior to a spawn’s rise. This spell cannot be cast on the body of a creature that has already been killed by a spawncreating undead.  SPECTRAL WEAPON  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Assassin 3, bard 4, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 0 ft. Effect: One shadowy blade Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes Yousummonforthsemisolidshadowstuff andforceittocoalesceintoashapeonlyyou can wield. The shadow-formed weapon looks real at ﬁrst glance, though it appears darkened as if perpetually in shadows. Wispsofshadowtendrilsconstantlyfollow the weapon as you move it about. Using material from the Plane of Shadow, you can fashion a quasi-real melee weapon of any type with which you are proﬁcient. This spectral weapon appears in your hand and behaves as a normal weapon of its type, with two exceptions. First, you resolve attacks with your spectral weapon as melee touch attacks instead of melee attacks. Second, any foe you hit is entitled to a Will save to recognize the weapon’s shadowy, semi-insubstantial nature. If the save is successful, that opponent takes only half damage from the weapon on that attack and all subsequent attacks, and is only 50% likely to suffer any special effects of your attacks (such as a death attack delivered with the weapon). You can maintain only one spectral weapon at a time, and only you can wield it. The weapon dissipates when you let  197  go of it or when the spell’s duration expires, whichever comes ﬁrst.  Illus. by D. Martin  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SPEECHLINK  Divination Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: You and one creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Tappingyourﬁngertothesideofyourhead and to your intended subject, you whisper wordsofgreetingtocompletethespell.You then hear your subject’s voice as if it were speaking directly into your ear. You and a willing subject can communicate verbally no matter how much distance you put between yourselves on the same plane. Either participant can end the spell at any time. Speechlink allows you and your allies each to hear the other’s vocalizations, whatever their volume. It does not transfer other sounds from either participant’s location. This spell works on any creatures, including animals, but does not convey any special language comprehension ability.  prepared spells for other spells from your spellbook. Each prepared spell must be swapped for a spell of the same level. Empty spell slots from a spell cast earlier in the day (including the casting of this spell) cannot be refreshed. Preparing spells within the light provided by a spell engine takes only half as long as normal. Material Components: A disk of polished bone, one of your tears, and a silver wheel worth 500 gp. XP Cost: 250 XP.  SPELL ENHANCER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round You utter an ancient word tied to the fundamental principles of magic and immediatelybegincasting another spell.  SPELL ENGINE  Abjuration [Force] Level: Wizard 8 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: 5-ft.-radius magical wheel Duration: See text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text You speak a word of abjuration and thrust aloft the bone disk andsilverwheel,heldtogetherby a single tear. The disk and wheel begin to spin, then vanish, but you feel the power of the mystic engine created nearby. Upon casting this spell, you can swap out any or all of your  198  A spectral weapon appears fearsome at ﬁrst glance  This spell enhances the next spell you cast, making it more difﬁcult for targets to resist. The next spell you cast this round is cast at +2 caster level, and its save DC increases by 1.  SPELL FLOWER  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Joiningmysteriousphraseswiththesimple motion of ﬂexing your ﬁngers, you imbue your hands with receptive magical energy that crackles and glows a soft orange. You are able to hold the charge for one touch spell per arm of your body as long as you don’t use a changed limb to cast another spell or touch anything with it. Each touch spell you cast resides in a different forelimb. For the duration of this spell, any touch spells you cast are discharged only if you cast another spell with that forelimb or touch something with that forelimb. For example, a human sorcerer casts this spell, then casts chill touch and holds the charge in his left hand, then casts shocking grasp and holds the charge in his right hand. Because of the spell ﬂower, he can hold the charge on both of these spells at the same time. If he casts another spell with a somatic component (which requires the use of one of his hands), he immediately loses one of his held touch spells (his choice), but if the spell he casts is also a touch spell, he can immediately hold the charge in the available hand. If he chooses to attack with a touch spell, it works normally. Since he has multiple limbs that are considered armed, he can make an off-hand attack with the other touch spell in the same round, with the normal penalties for ﬁghting with two weapons (PH 160).  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Silverymotesoflightbegintosnowdownas youcompletethespell,shiftingtoitsrecipientuponyoursuccessfultouch.Themotes coalesce into a nimbus that contracts and holds to the subject as a silvery sheen. This spell protects one creature from a single 1st- or 2nd-level spell. The creature effectively has unbeatable spell resistance regarding the chosen spell. Lesser spell immunity can’t protect a creature from a spell to which spell resistance doesn’t apply. This spell works against other spells, spell-like effects, and innate spell-like abilities. It does not protect against supernatural or extraordinary abilities, such as breath weapons or gaze attacks. Only a particular spell can be protected against, not a school of spells or a group of spells with similar effects; thus, a creature given immunity to inﬂict light wounds is still susceptible to inﬂict moderate wounds. A creature can have only one lesser spellimmunityorspellimmunity(PH282) in effect at a time.  SPELL MATRIX  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Effect: Matrix that holds two of your spells  SPELL MATRIX, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Effect: Matrix that holds three of your spells This spell functions like lesser spell matrix, except that you can store up to three spells of up to 3rd level, and you take 3d6 points of damage instead of 1d6 upon casting. The matrix closes after 3 rounds and no more spells can be added, even if it is not full. In addition, you can designate one spell or one spell sequence held in the matrix to come into effect under a condition you dictate when casting greater spell matrix. The spell (or sequence of spells) to be activated by the triggering condition must be of a type that affects your own person, such as levitate or feather fall. The conditions required to bring the desired spell or spells into effect must be clear, although they can be general. In all cases, greater spell matrix immediately brings into effect the designated spell or sequence of spells, which is cast instantaneously when the designated circumstances occur. You cannot choose to have the spell or spells not activate when the triggering event occurs. Focus: A diamond with a minimum value of 1,500 gp.  SPELL MATRIX, LESSER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Personal Effect: Matrix that holds one of your spells Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Concentrating as you intone the arcane words,youenvisionyourmindasamazeof paths and doors. You get a chill as the spell completes and some of the doors open. You prepare a magical matrix that allows you to store one of your spells and use it later as a swift action. In the round after you cast lesser spell matrix, you can cast one spell of up to 3rd level to be stored in it. The matrix closes after 1 round, whether or not you have stored a spell in it. Only a spell that can be altered by the Quicken Spell feat can be placed in the matrix, and any spell stored there is treated as a prepared spell. Casting lesser spell matrix deals 1d6 points of damage to you, and this damage cannot be healed by any means while the matrix exists. While the matrix is active, you can cast the spell stored in it as a swift action. Once it is cast from the matrix, the spell is gone. A dispel magic spell that successfully dispels the matrix also dispels the spell held inside it. If you are affected by an antimagic ﬁeld, the duration of the matrix is interrupted, but the spell does not activate. The matrix becomes active again when you emerge from the antimagic ﬁeld. If you die while the spell is still held in the matrix, both the spell and the matrix dissipate harmlessly. Focus: A piece of amber with a minimum value of 500 gp.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL IMMUNITY, LESSER  This spell functions like lesser spell matrix, except that you can store up to two spells of up to 3rd level, and you take 2d6 points of damage instead of 1d6 upon casting. The matrix closes after 2 rounds and no more spells can be added, even if it is not full. In addition, you can decide to link the two spells stored in the matrix into a spell sequence if both are 2nd level or lower. You can then discharge the two linked spells as a single swift action, just as if you were casting the lone spell from a spell matrix. Focus: A sapphire with a minimum value of 1,000 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A marilith spellcaster could do the same as the sorcerer in the previous example, except that she could hold the charge on up to six touch spells. She could also use any of her spell-like or supernatural abilities, since those do not interfere with holding a charge. If the spell ﬂower effect ends, the most recent touch spell cast remains as a held charge and all other held spells dissipate.  SPELL RESISTANCE, MASS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 7 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Wrapping your allies in protective magic, you give them the ability to shrug off spells. This spell functions like spell resistance (PH 282), except as noted here.  199  SPELL VULNERABILITY  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No  Avioletsprayspringsfromyourﬁngertips and wraps around your opponent. It fades intoadullpurpleglow,whichattractsspell energiesasopposedtoshruggingthemoff. This spell reduces the subject’s spell resistance by 1 per caster level (maximum reduction 15). This reduction can’t lower a subject’s spell resistance below 0.  Illus. by M. Phillippi  SPHERE OF ULTIMATE DESTRUCTION Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./ level) Effect: 2-ft.-radius sphere Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  When struck by the sphere, a subject takes 2d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 40d6). Any creature reduced to 0 or fewer hit points by this spell is disintegrated, leaving behind only a trace of ﬁne dust (though its equipment is unaffected). When used against an object, the sphere disintegrates as much as one 10-foot cube of nonliving matter. A creature or object that makes a successful Fortitude save is partially affected, taking only 5d6 points of damage. If this damage reduces the creature or object to 0 or fewer hit points, it is disintegrated. The effects of the sphere count as a disintegrate spell for the purpose of destroying a wall of force or any other spell or effect speciﬁcally affected by disintegrate. If the sphere moves beyond the spell’s range, it winks out. Material Component: A pinch of dust from a disintegrated creature.  SPIDER CURSE  Transmutation [Mind-Affecting] Level: Spider 6 Components: V, S, DF  Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller humanoid Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youpourthepowerofthespellintothebody of another. That creature, now but a vessel ofyourwill,takestheshapeofacentaurlike spider creature called a drider. You turn a humanoid into a creature resembling a drider (MM 89) that obeys your mental commands. The transmuted subject gains a spider’s body with a humanoid head, arms, and torso, just like a drider. The subject has a drider’s speed, natural armor, bite attack, and poison (but see below). The subject gains a +4 bonus to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution. The subject becomes size Large, with a space of 10 feet and a reach of 5 feet. The subject gains a –1 penalty to AC and on attack rolls due to size. The subject retains its Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, level and class,  Asyousuccessfullycomplete the intricate gestures and tongue-tying syllables of this spell, you conjure a featurelessblacksphereof nothingness. Matter that touches the sphere disappears, causing a slight breeze to form that blows endlessly in the directionoftheall-consuming blackness.  200  You create a terrible sphere that destroys anything it touches. The sphere ﬂies up to 30 feet per round. The sphere stops moving when it enters a space containing a creature, automatically striking it. You must actively direct it to a new target as a move action. A sphere of ultimate destruction destroys everything it touches  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Five summoned spiders Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youreyesrollingwildlyintheirsockets,you cackle the last few words to call upon your deity’spower.Anumberofmassivespiders spring up from the earth in the location you indicate. This spell summons ﬁve celestial or ﬁendish Large monstrous spiders (MM 289). They appear where you designate and act immediately, on your turn. They attack your opponents to the best of their ability. If you can communicate with the spiders, you can direct them not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform other actions. A celestial spider summoned by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite evil attack that provides a +4 bonus on one damage roll.  SPIDER POISON  Necromancy Level: Assassin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdthehuskofthespiderinyourhand and speak the words of the spell. The husk vanishes, but leaves in your palm the brief glowing image of a spider. You poison a subject by making a successful melee touch attack. The poison deals 1d6 points of Strength damage immediately and another 1d6 points of Strength damage 1 minute later. Each instance of damage can be negated by a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your relevant spellcasting ability modiﬁer (Intelligence for wizards and assassins, Charisma for sorcerers). Material Component: A poisonous spider, alive or dead.  SPIDER SHAPES  Transmutation Level: Spider 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One willing creature/level, all within 30 ft. of each other Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You channel the power of the spell into the willing masses before you, granting them the blessed forms of spiders. This spell functions like polymorph (PH 283), except that you polymorph up to one willing creature per level into a monstrous spider (MM 288) of any  size from Tiny to Huge as you decide. Unlike with polymorph, this spell allows the subjects to gain a spider’s poisonous bite. All the creatures you transmute must become spiders of the same size. Subjects remain in the spider form until the spell expires or you dismiss the spell for all subjects. In addition, an individual subject can choose to resume its normal form as a full-round action. Doing so ends the spell for that creature only.  SPIDERFORM  Transmutation Level: Drow 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  CHAPTER 1  SPIDER PLAGUE  A ﬁendish creature (MM 107) summoned by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite good attack that provides a +4 bonus on one damage roll. When you use a summoning spell to summon an evil or good creature, it is a spell of that type.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  hit points (despite any change in Constitution), alignment, base attack bonus, and base saves. (New Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores might affect ﬁnal Armor Class, attack, and save bonuses.) The subject’s equipment remains and continues to function as long as it ﬁts a drider’s body shape. Otherwise it is subsumed into the new form and ceases to function for the duration of the spell. Retained items include anything worn on the upper body (head, neck, shoulders, hands, arms, and waist). Nonfunctioning items include anything worn on the legs, feet, or the whole body (armor, robes, vestments, and boots). The subject’s bite delivers a poison with a Fortitude save DC of 16 + your Wisdom bonus. Initial and secondary damage is 1d6 points of Strength damage. Your control over the subject is like that provided by a dominate person spell (PH 224). (You telepathically control the creature as long as it remains within range.)  You invest the power of the spell into yourself, twisting and bending your own form into that of a spider. You can polymorph into a drider (MM 89) or a Tiny, Small, Medium, or Large monstrous spider (MM 288). You regain lost hit points as if you rested for a day on the initial transformation. The spell lasts until you decide to resume your normal shape. You acquire the physical and natural abilities of the creature you polymorph into, including natural size, Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution, armor, attack routines, and movement capabilities. You also acquire the poisonous bite and web-spinning ability of whichever spider form you choose. You retain your Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, level and class, hit points (despite any change in Constitution), alignment, base attack bonus, and base saves. (New Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores might affect ﬁnal attack and save bonuses.) You can cast spells and use magic items if you choose drider form, but no other spider form is capable of spellcasting or manipulating devices. If you choose drider form, your equipment remains and continues to function as long as it ﬁts a drider’s body shape. Retained items include anything worn on the upper body (head, neck, shoulders, hands, arms, and waist). Otherwise your equipment  201  is subsumed into the new form and ceases to function for the duration of the spell.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SPIDERSKIN  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You cast this spell upon yourself, and your ﬂesh glows yellow. The glow quickly subsides, but you feel your ﬂesh thicken, its surface growing harder and more like a carapace. The spell grants the recipient a +1 enhancement bonus to its existing natural armor bonus, a +1 racial bonus on saves against poison, and a +1 racial bonus on Hide checks for every three caster levels you have. This means that the bonuses to natural armor, saves, and Hide checks improve to +2 at caster level 6th, +3 at caster level 9th, +4 at 12th, and +5 at 15th. The enhancement bonus provided by spiderskin stacks with the subject’s natural armor bonus, but not with other enhancement bonuses to natural armor. A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0, much as a character wearing only normal clothing has an armor bonus of +0. Arcane Material Component: The leg of a spider.  SPIKES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 With the sound of twisting wood, the weapon you touch grows sharp spikes like rose thorns. This spell functions like brambles (page 38), except that the affected weapon gains a +2 enhancement bonus on its attack rolls, and its threat range is doubled. This effect does not stack with other effects that increase a weapon’s threat range, such as the Improved Critical feat.  202  SPIRIT WORM  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level, up to 5 rounds; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youpressthebitofblackenedboneagainst your foe and intone the spell. The bone vanishes, leaving a mottled bruise where it touched. You create a lingering decay in the spirit and body of the target. If the target fails its saving throw, it takes 1 point of Constitution damage each round while the spell lasts (maximum 5 points). The victim can attempt a Fortitude saving throw each round, and success negates the Constitution damage for that round and ends the spell. Material Component: A piece of ﬁreblackened ivory or bone carved in the shape of a segmented worm.  SPIRITJAWS  Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 + 10 ft./level) Effect: Jaws of force Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Youcalluponthepowerofthedinosaursto completethespell.Asetofghostlydinosaur jaws comes into being and attacks the creature you designate. This spell creates a set of powerful jaws of force. The jaws attempt to grapple the designated opponent, starting with one attack in the round the spell is cast and continuing each round thereafter. The spiritjaws use your base attack bonus (possibly allowing it multiple attacks per round in subsequent rounds) + your Wis modiﬁer as its attack bonus. If an initial attack hits, the spiritjaws deal 2d6 points of damage and attempt  to start a grapple as a free action. The jaws’ bonus on grapple checks is equal to their attack bonus + 4. Once the opponent is grappled, the jaws deal 2d6 points of damage with each subsequent grapple check. The target is considered to be grappling and cannot move. The target creature no longer threatens squares and loses its Dexterity bonus to AC against opponents not grappling it. The set of jaws always strikes from your direction. It does not get a bonus for ﬂanking or help a combatant get one. Your feats do not affect the jaws. If the jaws move beyond the range of the spell, they vanish. Attacking the set of jaws has no effect. As a magical force effect, the jaws cannot be damaged, but disintegrate or a sphere of annihilation destroys the effect. The grappled opponent can cast a spell only if the spell has no somatic component, the material components are in hand, and a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level) is made. A creature grappled by the set of jaws can attempt to escape by succeeding on a grapple check against the jaws or by making a successful Escape Artist check as a standard action opposed by the set of jaws’ grapple check. As a free action, you can direct the jaws to pin a grappled opponent instead of dealing damage with a grapple check. If the jaws win the opposed grapple check, the opponent is pinned. A pinned opponent is held immobile and must break the pin before it can escape the grapple. Creatures other than those grappling the pinned target gain a +4 bonus on attack rolls to hit it. If the jaws have multiple attacks (granted by your attack bonus), you can use them to cause damage to a pinned target or to make more grapple attempts against that target. If you become unable to command the jaws, they vanish. Material Component: A piece of bone from a dinosaur’s jaw.  SPIRITUAL CHARIOT  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Blackguard 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One special mount Duration: 1 hour/level  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You cast this spell, and a large and ornate chariot made of transparent, faintly glowingazureenergyformsbehindyourspecial mount.  SPLINTERBOLT  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One or more streams of splinters Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS Illus. by L. Parillo  You conjure a chariot of force. When the chariot appears, your special mount is correctly harnessed to it. The chariot can hold one Medium creature or two Small creatures plus the driver (usually the paladin). Although the chariot seems large and sturdy, it and its occupants have no weight for the purpose of the mount’s load, so the mount can travel at full speed. If the chariot is ever unhitched from the special mount, it disappears. The driver of the spiritual chariot gains a +4 sacred bonus on Handle Animal checks. The chariot is made of magical force and has immunity to most types of damage. It interacts with other spells just as a wall of force (PH 298) does. Those in the chariot have cover based on their size and the position of their attackers. In most situations, Medium creatures inside the chariot gain cover.  is disrupted. A living creature passing through the wall takes 1d10 points of damage, as above, and must make a Fortitude save or gain one negative level. The barrier is semimaterial and opaque, providing cover and total concealment against physical attacks, and it blocks line of effect for magical effects (including spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities). Material Component: A clear cut gemstone.  SPIRITWALL  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./ level) Effect: Swirling wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level, or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 1 ft./level Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No With a deep groan, as from a being subjectedtoeternalpain,youunleashthespell. Animmobile,swirlingmassofgreen-white forms resembling tortured spirits forms nearby.Themasscontinuesthelowgroaning you uttered while casting the spell. One side of the wall, selected by you, emits a low groaning that causes creatures within 60 feet of that side to make a Will save or become frightened and ﬂee for 1d4 rounds. Any living creature that merely touches the wall takes 1d10 points of damage as its life force A spirit wall can only effectively bar the living  203  Illus. by F. Vohwindel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You extend your hand toward your foe, ﬂicking a single sliver of wood into the air, and a splinter larger than a titan’s javelin whistles through the air. You must make a ranged attack to hit the target. If you hit, the splinterbolt deals 4d6 points of piercing damage. A splinterbolt threatens a critical hit on a roll of 18–20. You can ﬁre one additional splinterbolt for every four levels beyond 3rd (to a maximum of three at 11th level). You can ﬁre these splinterbolts at the same or different targets, but all splinterbolts must be aimed at targets within 30 feet of each other and ﬁred simultaneously. A creature’s damage reduction, if any, applies to the damage from this spell. The damage from splinterbolt is treated as magic and piercing for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Material Component: A splinter of wood.  SPONTANEOUS SEARCH  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) With a leisurely wave and a declaration of boredom, you complete the spell. You instantlybecomeawareofthelocationand types of objects in the spell’s area, as if you had made a quick search. The subject of this spell knows the contents of a 20-foot-radius burst, as if it had taken 10 on a Search check for each object and space in the burst radius, including noting the location of traps (though only a rogue can locate those traps with a DC greater than 20). Material Component: A silk glove.  STABILIZE  204  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Paladin 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action  Area: 50-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Filled with compassion and concern, you draw upon your deity’s power. A burst of goldenenergyspringsforth,spreadingfrom you. Those still alive around you seem less bloody and in less pain. This spell, designed to work on the battleﬁeld, allows you to stabilize the dying all around you. A burst of positive energy spreads out from you, healing 1 point of damage to all living creatures in the affected area, whether allied or not. This spell deals 1 point of damage to undead creatures, which are allowed a Will saving throw to negate the effect.  STALKING BRAND  Transmutation Level: Ranger 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes With a wave of your hand, you cause a tiny mark to appear upon the target’s forehead. “I will know you in any form or visage,” you say. This spell marks your target with a tiny symbol visible only to you and to detect magic. The brand appears as you envision it, approximately 1 inch in diameter. You can see the brand even if the subject uses magical means to change or hide its appearance. Spells suchasdisguiseself,polymorph,andinvisibility do not hide the brand. To your eyes, the mark glows a light green.  STALWART PACT  Evocation Level: Cleric 5, Pact 5 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched  Duration: Permanent until triggered, then 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your ally and empower him with a spell that will later take effect in dire need. Once this spell is cast, it remains dormant until the subject is reduced to half or less of its full normal hit points. Once the subject has taken enough damage to reduce it to half or lower hit points, it immediately gains 5 temporary hit points per two caster levels (maximum 35 hit points at 14th level), damage reduction 5/magic, and a +2 luck bonus on saving throws. The hit points, damage reduction, and saving throw bonus disappear when the spell ends. Material Component: Incense worth 250 gp.  STANDING WAVE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Waves under a creature or object within range Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes Roaring a binding phrase, you take command of the water, causing a wave to rise and propelling it in the direction you desire. You command the waters to lift a creature or object and propel it forward. An object so lifted can contain creatures or other objects. The maximum size of the creature or object the wave can lift depends on your caster level. Caster Level 5th 7th 9th 11th 13th  Size of Creature or Object Medium Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  Standing wave moves the lifted creature or object in a straight line at a  The standing wave spell is useful for moving foes—and for simply moving  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  speed of 60 feet over water. The spell dissipates when the wave contacts land, lowering its burden harmlessly to shore. If you are riding in or standing on the object, the object continues to move until you are no longer in or on the object or the spell is dismissed; otherwise, the object is moved to the extent of the spell’s range when you cast the spell.  STARVATION  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Your stomach growls as you near completionofthespell.Asyoudeclarethetargetof the spell, your hunger disappears, but you notewithsatisfactionthatyourtargetseems wracked with pain. You inﬂict wracking hunger pangs on the target creature. It must make a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) and become fatigued. A creature that makes a successful save takes half damage and is not fatigued by the spell. A fatigued creature becomes exhausted when doing anything that causes the creature to become fatigued (such as dangerous environmental temperatures or ending a barbarian rage). A fatigued creature that fails its saving throw against starvation takes nonlethal damage as normal and becomes exhausted. Material Component: A piece of spoiled food.  STEELDANCE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Two swords or daggers Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  206  You place the two daggers in your outstretchedpalmandcastthespell.Theyrise from your hands, glowing with a dim blue radiance.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  The two daggers hover about you, attacking foes that come near. On your turn, each blade can make an attack at an adjacent opponent, with an attack bonus equal to your caster level + your relevant ability modiﬁer. The damage they deal is equal to the normal weapon damage (1d4 for daggers) + your ability modiﬁer (Intelligence for wizards and Charisma for sorcerers). The weapons are treated as magic for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Your blades can be attacked with sunder or disarm attempts as if you were wielding them, and they use the above attack bonus to resolve such situations. Disarming a weapon under the effect of steeldance ends the spell for that weapon. Focus: Two bladed weapons, such as daggers or longswords.  Yourﬁngersexudeaslightlyviscoussecretion and become more nimble. When touched together, your ﬁngertips stick slightly.  STICK  Transmutation Level: Bard 0, sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Nonmagical, unattended object weighing up to 5 lb. Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Lacking someone to hold the item where you need it, you mutter and wave your handinasimplegesturebeforestickingthe item in place. Stick afﬁxes one object weighing up to 5 pounds to another object. The two items can be separated with even a small amount of force, such as a wind stronger than 10 mph, a mage hand or unseen servant spell, or a move action by any corporeal creature (which provokes attacks of opportunity). Material Component: A bit of dried glue.  STICKY FINGERS Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, bard 1 Components: S  This spell grants you a +10 bonus on Sleight of Hand checks.  STICKY SADDLE  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) A colorless glow surrounds you and your mountforaninstant.Whentheglowfades, you feel more attentive to the movements of your mount even while an unseen force holds you fast to it. This spell “glues” you to your mount. It becomes impossible for you to fall or be thrown off your mount. Prying you from the saddle requires a DC 20 Strength check, and you gain a +10 bonus on Ride checks related to staying in the saddle. The spell must be cast after you are seated on your mount. If you are not seated on your mount when the spell is cast, the spell fails. If the spell is cast while you are riding bareback, you are “stuck” to the mount’s back. Otherwise, you are merely stuck to the saddle, but the saddle is attached to the mount normally. If you are knocked unconscious while this spell is in effect, you automatically remain in the saddle. The spell can be dismissed as an immediate action, and it does not impede the rider from making a soft fall if the mount is dropped in battle.  STING RAY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level  Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes From your outstretched hand leaps forth a rayofglitteringenergyapparentlycomposed ofcountlessminusculewrithinginsects.The humofminutechitinousbodiesscrambling over one another ﬁlls the air.  Necromancy [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature that breathes air Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  Transmutation Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Astheechoesofyourspellcastingdie,your ﬂesh begins to stiffen and turn gray, gaining the rough texture and consistency of stone. This spell transforms your body into living stone, which grants you several powerful resistances and abilities. You gain damage reduction 10/adamantine. You are immune to blindness,  Sticky saddle gives a caster the ability to stay in the saddle, no matter how her mount moves  Illus. by J. Engle  With a clenched ﬁst, you make a tugging motion toward your target. A transparent, barely perceptible hand appears to plunge into your target’s mouth.  STONE BODY  CHAPTER 1  STOLEN BREATH  With this spell, you steal all the air from the subject’s lungs, causing it to suffer a momentary respiratory crisis. It can take shallow breaths and act normally but is considered sickened for 1 minute. At any time during this minute, the subject can take a full-round action to get its wind back, ending the condition. Focus: A stoppered glass vial. SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. When this ray successfully strikes, it creates a sensation of many tiny insects biting and crawling on the victim’s body. The target can attempt a Will save each round to shake off the effect. Until the spell is shrugged off, the victim is hampered by the unsettling feeling of all the stinging and biting, and is able to perform only a single move or standard action each round. The victim also takes a –2 penalty to AC. In addition, if the victim attempts to cast a spell, it must succeed on a Concentration check with a DC equal to the sting ray’s DC + the level of the spell the subject is attempting to cast. For example, if a 6th-level sorcerer with a Charisma score of 16 casts sting ray on a wizard casting a ﬁreball, the  Concentration check DC is 19 (16 [sting ray DC] + 3 [ﬁreball spell level]). A successful Will save negates the effect restricting the subject’s action to one move or one standard action each round, nor does the subject need to make a Concentration check each time it wishes to cast a spell. However, the subject still takes the penalty to AC for the duration of the spell with a successful save. Material Component: Four dried stinging insects (bees, wasps, and so on).  207  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  extra damage from critical hits, ability score damage, deafness, disease, drowning, poison, stunning, and all spells or attacks that affect your physiology or respiration, because you have no physiology or respiration while this spell is in effect. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, but you take a –4 penalty to Dexterity (minimum Dexterity 1). Your speed is reduced to one-half normal, and your weight increases by a factor of three. If you are targeted with transmute rock to mud, you are slowed for 2d6 rounds with no saving throw. A transmute mud to rock heals you of all your lost hit points. A stone to ﬂesh spell cast on you automatically ends this spell. Arcane Material Component: A small piece of stone that was once part of a stone golem, a greater earth elemental, or a castle’s outer wall.  Illus. by J. Thomas  STONE BONES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Corporeal undead creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Abriefﬂashengulfsyourally,andthrough his ﬂesh you can see his skeleton. The skeleton glows a foggy gray for a moment, thickening with eldritch power, then all is as it was before. You cause the skeleton of the target corporeal undead to become thicker and as strong as stone. This gives the subject a +3 enhancement bonus to its existing natural armor. Arcane Focus: A miniature skull carved of granite.  STONE SHAPE, GREATER  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Cleric 5, druid 5, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Target: Stone or stone objects touched, up to 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./ level  208  Stone shatter sends a heartrendingly pure note to the center of any stone  You mutter the ancient words, and your hands glow yellow where they touch the stone. Where you touch, the stone seems as soft as clay. This spell functions like stone shape (PH 284), except that it affects a much larger quantity of stone.  STONE SHATTER Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./level) Target: One stone object or creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None or Fortitude half; see text Spell Resistance: No You call up energies from deep within you andutteraperfectnote.Thestonerocksasit is struck, and cracks appear in its form. You aim a single note of perfect pitch toward an unattended stone object  weighing no more than 2 pounds per caster level, or toward a stone creature, causing it to shatter. A stone object is destroyed, whereas a stone creature (of any weight) takes 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6), with a Fortitude save for half damage.  STONE SPHERE  You create a smoothly polished, 5-footdiameter sphere of stone that moves under your control at a speed of 30 feet. A stone sphere has AC 5, hardness 8, and 500 hit points. In the round when you cast the spell, the stone sphere appears at the spot you designate within the spell’s range, and you can direct its movement as a free action. In subsequent rounds, you must actively direct the stone sphere in order to move it; otherwise, it remains motionless. Directing the movement of a stone sphere in any round after its initial appearance requires a move action. If you move a stone sphere into a square occupied by an enemy, it stops moving and deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to every creature in that square. A successful Reﬂex save negates the damage. Material Component: A smooth sphere of marble 1 inch in diameter.  STONE SPIDERS  Transmutation Level: Spider 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: Three pebbles, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  This spell transforms three pebbles into stone constructs that resemble monstrous spiders. The constructs can be any size from Tiny to Huge as you decide, but all the constructs you create must be the same size. The constructs have the same statistics as monstrous spiders (MM 288) of the appropriate size, except as noted here. • Their natural armor bonus increases by 6. • They have damage reduction 10/ magic. • Their poison has a Fortitude save DC of 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your Wis modiﬁer. Initial and secondary damage is 1d3 points of Strength damage. If the constructs can hear your commands, you can direct them not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform other actions. Otherwise, they simply attack your enemies to the best of their ability.  STONEHOLD  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: One 10-ft. square/level Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes (object) When the energy of this spell bursts forth, the ground erupts with multiple humansizedarmsmadeofsolidrock.Asyouﬁnish casting, they retreat beneath the stone surface, a trap set for future trespassers. This spell conjures thick stony arms that spring forth from any rock or stone formation whenever anyone passes near it. Each 10-foot square in the spell’s area contains one stone arm. Any creature that enters the area of the spell is immobilized by the arms unless it succeeds on a Reﬂex save.  CHAPTER 1  You toss the marble in the air, and it vanishes as you speak the words of the spell. A largerversionofthemarble,ﬁvefeetacross, appears in the hallway and bears down on your foe.  Youimbuethreesmallstoneswithmagical power,causingthemtotwistandgrowinto large stone spiders.  Such a creature is rooted in place and unable to move. It can take actions normally; it just can’t move from the space it currently occupies. Held creatures take 1d6+5 points of damage each round, at the beginning of your turn. Creatures that succeed on the Reﬂex save can move through the area normally. Creatures that start their turn in the affected area must attempt another Reﬂex save or be affected by the spell. A held creature can attempt a DC 20 Strength check or a DC 25 Escape Artist check to break free, and can also break free by dealing enough damage to destroy the arm. An arm has AC 15, hardness 8, and 15 hit points. Before they attack, the arms remain beneath the surface of the stone. They can be discovered (but not disarmed) as a magic trap can be.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One 5-ft.-diameter stone sphere Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  STONY GRASP  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Effect: Animated stone arm Duration: 1 round/level By thrusting your arm downward, you complete the casting of the spell. Nearby, a roughly formed arm about the size of a human erupts from the ground and grasps at the air. This spell functions like earthen grasp (page 76), except as noted here. The stony arm can appear from any natural surface, including unworked rock, earth, mud, grass, or sand. The stone arm has AC 18, hardness 8, and 4 hit points per caster level. Material Component: A miniature hand sculpted from stone.  STORM OF ELEMENTAL FURY  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: 40-ft.-radius storm cloud, 200 ft. above the ground Duration: 4 rounds Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  209  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  With a thunderous boom, a black storm cloud appears over your enemies, striking them with a terrifying combination of effects from the Elemental Planes. Each round, the storm generates one of the following effects, starting with the ﬁrst effect, then progressing to the second, until it has run its 4-round course. 1st Round: A storm of elemental fury buffets the area immediately beneath it with a whirling windstorm (DMG 94–95). Ranged attacks within the area of the storm are impossible, and Small or smaller creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be blown away. Medium creatures must make their Fortitude save or be knocked prone, and Large or larger creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save to move that round. Flying creatures that fail their saves are instead blown in a random direction, traveling 1d6×5 feet if Large or larger, 1d6×10 feet if Medium, and 2d6×10 feet if Small or smaller. Spells cast within the area are disrupted unless the caster succeeds on a Concentration check against a DC equal to thestormofelementalfury’ssaveDC + the level of the spell the caster is trying to cast. 2nd Round: Chunks of rock fall from the sky, dealing 5d6 points of damage (no save) to all creatures in the storm. 3rd Round: A deluge of rain extinguishes unprotected ﬂames and perhaps protected ones as well (50% chance). The torrential downpour reduces visibility to 5 feet and cuts movement in half. 4th Round: Flame pelts the area beneath the storm cloud, dealing 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) (Reﬂex half).  STORM TOWER  210  Abjuration [Air] Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 100 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youformanenormoustowerofdark,swirling storm clouds and howling wind.  succeed on a Fortitude saving throw to enter; otherwise, they are checked at the edge. Anyone within a storm tower has concealment relative to those outside the tower. The howling winds of a storm tower also apply a –10 penalty on Listen checks made within 50 feet of it (including all those made inside the tower).  STORMRAGE  Transmutation [Electricity] Level: Cleric 8, druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  You harness the powers of wind andstormtomove,protectyourself, and attack.  Storm tower gives a druid respite from foes  A storm tower absorbs any electricity damage dealt to those within it. Magic missiles cannot be cast into, out of, or within a storm tower. The storm tower is composed of windstorm-strength winds (DMG 95), making ranged attacks impossible within it, though it has no effect on the movement of creatures within it. However, only Gargantuan or Colossal creatures can pass through the outer edge of the storm tower; all creatures of smaller size must  You can ﬂy at a speed of 40 feet, and you gain immunity to thrown weapons and projectile ranged attacks. You are completely unaffected by natural or magical wind, easily able to hold your position and not subject to other adverse effects of extreme wind. Finally, you can discharge a bolt of electricity from your eyes once per round. You enemies’ spell resistance applies to these lightning attacks. Doing this is a standard action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity, has a range of 100 feet, and requires a ranged touch attack. You gain a +3 bonus on the attack roll if the opponent is wearing metal armor, made out of metal, or carrying a lot of metal. If you hit, the bolt deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6), with no saving throw allowed.  STRATEGIC CHARGE Abjuration Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  A red nimbus surrounds you as you move smoothly across the crowded battleﬁeld.  You gain the beneﬁt of the Mobility feat (PH 98), even if you not meet the prerequisites. You do not have to be charging to gain this beneﬁt.  STRENGTH OF STONE  The spell grants you a +8 enhancement bonus to Strength. The spell ends instantly if you lose contact with the ground. This means you cannot jump, tumble, charge, run, or move more than your speed in a round (because these acts cause both of your feet to leave the ground) without breaking the spell. A natural stone wall or ceiling counts as the ground for the purpose of this spell (so you could climb a cavern wall and not lose the spell).  STUN RAY  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1d4+1 rounds; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes A quick jolt of electricity darts from your raised hand. The slight smell of ozone lingers afterward. You blast an enemy with a scintillating ray of electricity. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The target is stunned for 1d4+1 rounds by the ray of electricity. If the subject makes a successful Fortitude save, it is stunned for only 1 round. Creatures that have immunity to electricity are not affected by this spell. Material Component: A coiled copper wire.  Youbreatheout,andyourbreathweaponis mixedwithheavy,bluespheresofmagical energy. Those that survive your onslaught are left standing but stunned. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon that deals hit point damage, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you imbue your breath weapon with concussive force that can stun those caught in its area. Creatures that take damage from the breath weapon must make successful Fortitude saves (DC equal to your breath weapon save DC) or be stunned for 1 round.  STUNNING BREATH, GREATER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8  This spell functions like stunning breath, except that creatures that fail their Fortitude saves are stunned for 2d4 rounds.  SUBMERGE SHIP  Evocation [Water] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Ship touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Holding forth a miniature rudder, you touchthetargetship.Immediatelyyoufeel connectedtoit,knowingtheintricatedetails of its construction. You sense an invisible aura surrounding the ship and permeatingitseveryspace.Althoughitseemstobe riding lower in the water than its weight wouldsuggest,youinstinctivelyknowthat you can control its every movement.  CHAPTER 1  You call upon the fortitude of the powers ofgood,andyourﬂeshturns anivory-gray hue as you draw power up through the earth itself.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: Instantaneous  You grant the ship touched a swim speed of 60 feet and the ability to move beneath the surface of the water. You can control the ship’s speed and direction as a free action. All interior spaces of the ship remain dry even if a doorway or porthole is open while the ship is underwater. Any creature aboard the ship when the spell is cast can move about the ship with ease (including climbing and jumping) as if it were aﬂoat on a calm sea. Such creatures can breathe water for the duration of the spell as long as they remain within 10 feet of the ship. External forces, such as a storm or an angry dragon, can still jostle the ship and cause it to shake and possibly knock passengers and objects from it, but nothing falls from the ship as a result of your direction of its movement. You can transfer control of the ship to another individual by giving that individual the miniature rudder you used as a focus to cast the spell. If the focus is ever lost or becomes unattended, the spell’s duration expires. Once the spell ends (either because the duration expired, the focus was lost or became unattended, or the magic was successfully dispelled), the magic lingers for 1 additional round per caster level. During this time, the ship ascends toward the water’s surface at a rate of 60 feet per round. If the ship is still underwater when this additional time runs out, it immediately sinks, and its passengers risk drowning. Focus: A miniature wooden rudder inlaid with silver, worth 2,500 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  STUNNING BREATH  SUBVERT PLANAR ESSENCE  Transmutation Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Takingcommandoftheforcesthatconnect your plane to others, you reach out with your will and deaden an area to the inﬂuence of the Outer Planes on its natives.  211  The submerge ship spell allows everyone to travel beneath the waves  You point your ﬁnger upward and utter a curt shout. Immediately, a razor-sharp stalagmiteburstsfromthegroundtoimpale your foe. This spell creates a stalagmite about 1 foot wide at its base and up to 10 feet tall. If it encounters a ceiling before it reaches full size, it stops growing. The stalagmite grows from the ground under the target creature and shoots upward. An airborne creature within 10 feet of the ground gains a +4 bonus on its saving throw, and airborne creatures more than 10 feet above the ground cannot be harmed by this spell. The stalagmite deals 1d6 points of piercing damage per caster level (maximum 10d6). In addition, a target that  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Evil] Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned babau demon Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No A puff of smoke erupts from the ground, smellingofbrimstoneandburningcorpses. From the smoke strides the leathery form of a babau demon. This spell summons a babau demon (MM 40) from the Inﬁnite Layers of the Abyss. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. A summoned creature cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature, nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities.  SUMMON BEARDED DEVIL  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil, Lawful] Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF  Aﬁreﬂaresfromtheground,thensubsides immediately. In the place of the ﬁrst is the hunchbackedformofabarbazu,brandishing a saw-toothed glaive. This spell summons a bearded devil (MM 52) from the Nine Hells of Baator. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. A summoned creature cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature, nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities.  SUMMON BRALANI ELADRIN  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Good] Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned bralani eladrin Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No  SUMMON BABAU DEMON  Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned bearded devil Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by J. Thomas  SUDDEN STALAGMITE  fails to make a saving throw against this spell and takes damage from it is impaled on the stalagmite and cannot move from its current location until it makes a DC 15 Escape Artist check. The stalagmite can be removed in other ways as well, such as with a stone shape spell. The victim can break free with a DC 25 Strength check, although doing this deals it 3d6 points of slashing damage. A creature’s damage reduction, if any, applies to the damage from this spell. The damage from sudden stalagmite is treated as piercing for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Outsiders within the emanation of a subvert planar essence spell ﬁnd their connection disrupted with the planar forces that created them. Outsiders that fail their saves have their damage reduction and spell resistance each reduced by 10. For example, a barbed devil subject to subvert planar essence would have no damage reduction and spell resistance 13, while a pit ﬁend would have damage reduction 5/good and silver, and spell resistance 22. An outsider attempts a Fortitude save and checks spell resistance when it ﬁrst enter the spell’s area. If it makes the save or the spell fails to overcome its spell resistance, that creature is thereafter unaffected by this casting of subvert planar essence and can enter and exit the spell area without making further saves. Outsiders that fail their saves and have their spell resistance overcome by the spell are affected as long as they remain within the spell’s area, and they are automatically affected if they leave and reenter the area. Arcane Material Component: A tuning fork made from cold iron.  A glowing blue seal appear on the ground and then subsides immediately. When it has vanished entirely, a bralani eladrin appears. This spell summons a bralani eladrin (MM 93) from the Olympian Glades of Arborea. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action.  213  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SUMMON ELEMENTAL MONOLITH  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Cleric 9, druid 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One summoned elemental monolith Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You call into being a gigantic, roughly humanoid creature composed entirely of elementalmatter.Thecreatureimmediately attacks a nearby enemy. You conjure a tremendously powerful creature known as an elemental monolith (Complete Arcane 156). It appears at the spot you designate and acts immediately on your turn, attacking your opponents to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. If you speak the elemental monolith’s language and are close enough to communicate with it, you can direct it not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform other actions. A monolith can’t be summoned into an environment hostile to it in any way (for example, you couldn’t summon a ﬁre monolith underwater or an earth monolith high in midair). When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, earth, ﬁre, or water creature, it becomes a spell of that type. Material Component: A gem worth 100 gp—aquamarine for air, tourmaline for earth, garnet for ﬁre, or pearl for water.  SUMMON ELEMENTITE SWARM  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned elementite swarm Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round  214  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You summon what looks like a host of smallpebbles,whichimmediatelydescend upon your foes. This spell summons an elementite swarm (Planar Handbook 114)—air, earth, ﬁre, or water, at your option— from the appropriate Elemental Plane. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, earth, ﬁre, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.  SUMMON ELYSIAN THRUSH  Conjuration (Summoning) [Good] Level: Bard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned Elysian thrush Duration: 8 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You evoke the powers of Elysium and of song, and the bird responds. It is about two feet long, with a resplendent orange breast and multicolored feathers. It settles upon a branch and begins to sweetly warble. This spell summons an Elysian thrush (Planar Handbook 118), a birdlike creature native to the Blessed Fields of Elysium. The creature has no signiﬁcant combat utility, but its song accelerates the natural healing rate of living creatures. Those within 30 feet who listen to the thrush’s song while resting recover at twice the normal natural healing rate.  SUMMON GREATER ELEMENTAL  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF  Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned elemental Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You call upon the powers of nature, and they respond to your command. A huge wavewellsupbeforeyou,darkeyeswithin it regarding you from beneath the water. You point at the boat in the bay, and say, “Sink it.” This spell summons a greater elemental (MM 96–100)—air, earth, ﬁre, or water, at your option—from the appropriate Elemental Plane. The greater elemental appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, earth, ﬁre, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.  SUMMON HOUND ARCHON  Conjuration (Summoning) [Good, Lawful] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned hound archon Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You invoke the powers of good and law, and a brilliant beam stabs from the heavens above. Out of that beam strides a red-ﬂeshed, dog-headed humanoid with a greatsword. This spell summons a hound archon (MM 16) from the Seven Mounting Heavens of Celestia. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its  ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. A summoned creature cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature, nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities.  SUMMON UNDEAD II  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 2, cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  SUMMON UNDEAD I  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 3rd-level list, two undead of the same kind from the 2nd-level list, or four undead of the same kind from the 1st-level list.  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  SUMMON UNDEAD IV  Summon undead puts control of undead minions in the hands of even apprentice wizards  This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 2nd-level list or two undead of the same kind from the 1st-level list.  pqqqqqqqqqqqqrs  SUMMON UNDEAD LISTS  1st Level: Human warrior skeleton (MM 226), kobold zombie (MM 266) 2nd Level: Owlbear skeleton (MM 226), bugbear zombie (MM 267). 3rd Level: Ghoul (MM 118), troll skeleton (MM 227), ogre zombie (MM 267). 4th Level: Allip (MM 10), ghast (MM 119), wyvern zombie (MM 267). 5th Level: Mummy (MM 190), shadow (MM 221), vampire spawn (MM 253), wight (MM 255).  pqqqqqqqqqqqqrs  This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 4th-level list, two undead of the same kind from the 3rd-level list, or four undead of the same kind from a lower-level list.  Illus. by R. Spears  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 4, cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  The undead you summon appear in a burst of smoke and fog. The vapor swiftly dissipates, but you can’t shake the impression of screaming faces in the cloud’s tendrils. This spell functions like summonmonsterI(PH285), except that you summon an undead creature. Summon undead I conjures one of the creatures from the 1st-level list in the accompanying sidebar. You choose which creature to summon, and you can change that choice each time you cast the spell. Summoned undead do not count toward the total Hit Dice of undead that you can control with animate dead or the other command undead abilities. No undead creature you summon can have more Hit Dice than your caster level +1. Focus: A tiny bag, a small (not lit) candle, and a carved bone from any humanoid.  SUMMON UNDEAD III  SUMMON UNDEAD V  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 5th-level list, two undead of the same kind from the 4thlevel list, or four undead of the same kind from a lower-level list.  SUPERIOR (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with superior is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a  215  superior spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SUPPRESS BREATH WEAPON  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature that has a breath weapon Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: No You shout out the words of this spell and the creature’s throat constricts, a blue ring of runes visible around its neck. The subject of this spell cannot use its breath weapon for the duration of the spell.  SUPPRESS GLYPH  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 100 ft. Area: 100-ft.-radius burst centered on you. Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You cast the spell, and a dancing crown of ruby runes orbits your head brieﬂy.  216  You gain an enhanced awareness of magical writing within range. Magical writing such as a glyph of warding, explosiverunes,sepiasnakesigil,orsymbol is covered by a blue nimbus of light (which sheds light equal to a candle). This effect reveals the location of the writing without triggering it. For every source of magical writing, you can make a dispel check (1d20 + your caster level, maximum +10) against a DC equal to 11 + the writing’s caster level. If you are successful, the magical writing is suppressed for 1 minute per caster level. You and other creatures could then read a book warded by explosive runes, or open a drawer guarded  by a glyph of warding, or pass through a doorway protected by a symbol without effect. This spell covers and negates any active or triggered magical writing (such as a quickly scribed symbol of fear or a triggered symbol of death), although creatures that have already succumbed to the effect of the writing are unaffected. Once this spell ends, all magical writing in the area can be triggered normally, and active or triggered writings resume their function if they have any duration left.  SUREFOOT  Abjuration Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level You speak a few words and motion toward your feet, which begin to glow with a green hue. Your steps are sure and true, even on the narrowest ledges. You gain a +10 competence bonus on Balance, Climb, Jump, and Tumble checks. In addition, you do not lose your Dexterity bonus to AC when balancing or climbing.  SUREFOOTED STRIDE Transmutation Level: Bard 2, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Youbecomeassurefootedasanymountain goat, and the power of your magic makes walking in treacherous terrain child’s play. You can move through difﬁcult terrain (PH 163) at full speed for the duration of this spell, and you can even run, charge, and tumble through such terrain as though it were clear terrain. You also gain a +2 competence bonus on Climb checks.  SUREFOOTED STRIDE, MASS  Transmutation Level: Bard 5, druid 4, ranger 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart This spell functions like surefooted stride, except as noted here.  SUSPENDED SILENCE  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One object Duration: 24 hours or until discharged, then 6 rounds; see text Saving Throw: None (object) Spell Resistance: No (object) You sprinkle the object with a handful of gem dust, and the last words of your spell fade like they are being dragged into a hole. Then the normal sounds of the world reestablishthemselves,butthespellwithin is set to be unleashed later. When you touch the object and give the command word you designate, the object becomes the subject of a silence spell. The effect of the silence spell moves with the object and lasts for 6 rounds. Material Component: A feather and a handful of gem dust worth 50 gp.  SWAMP LUNG  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature with a respiratory system Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No You take a deep breath and feel the power of the spell surround you. Choosing your target, you unleash the spell’s energy. A sea-green halo forms around your target’s head.Momentslater,thetargetedcreature begins coughing up water.  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Druid 5, ranger 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level or until expended; see text Instinctively, you know the depth of the nearest pool of water, as well as other pools nearbyofasimilardepth.Inyourmind’seye you see the pools connected to one another magically, as if each were a doorway with a tunnel linking it to all the others. This spell functions like tree stride (PH 296), but it is used for diving into pools of water rather than trees. Each pool must be at least 1 foot deep, and the exit pool of water must be similar in depth to the entry pool (within 1 foot). Unlike with tree stride, each jump has a maximum range of 500 feet. All other effects and limitations are the same.  SWIFT (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with swift is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a swift spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  SWIM  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature  Making the sound of crashing waves with your throat completes the spell. With a wave of your hand, your subject seems more streamlined, with a hint of webbed appendages. This spell gives the recipient a swim speed of 30 feet (although not the ability to breathe water or hold one’s breath beyond normal limits). As long as the creature isn’t carrying more than a light load, it can swim without making Swim checks. It also gains a +8 bonus on any Swim checks to perform special actions or avoid hazards, though it still takes the normal penalty for weight carried (–1 per 5 pounds). The recipient can choose to take 10 on Swim checks, even if rushed or threatened, and can use the run action while swimming if it swims in a straight line. If the creature is carrying more than a light load, it must make Swim checks to move (taking the normal penalty for weight carried), but all other beneﬁts of the spell still apply. Material Component: A goldﬁsh scale.  SWIM, MASS  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 4 Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Choosing carefully the recipients of your spell, you cause a blue-green glow to emanate from each one. Moments later, the emanation fades, leaving the chosen creatureslookingmorelithebutwithmore robust limbs. The spell functions like swim, except that it affects multiple creatures.  SWORD OF DARKNESS Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Effect: Black blade of negative energy  You shatter the sword in your hand against a stone, bringing into being a similar weapon made entirely of black energy. As soon as it forms, the black blade attacks.  This spell functions like sword of deception (see below), except that you cause a black blade of pure negative energy to appear and attack opponents at a distance, as directed by you. Instead of dealing damage, a sword of darkness bestows one negative level on each successful hit against a living creature, threatens a critical hit on a roll of 19–20, and bestows two negative levels on a critical hit. Negative levels usually have a chance of permanently draining the subject’s levels, but the negative levels from sword of darkness don’t last long enough to do so. However, if the subject gains at least as many negative levels as it has Hit Dice, it dies. If the sword strikes an undead creature, it grants that creature 5 temporary hit points per two caster levels (maximum 25 temporary hit points) that last for up to 1 hour. Material Component: A bastard sword or longsword, which is shattered against a stone while casting the spell.  CHAPTER 1  SWAMP STRIDE  Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell causes stagnant swamp water to ﬂood the target’s lungs. If the target is unable to breathe water, it must cough it out. If it makes the save, then this expulsion is done with little effort. If it fails the save, the creature falls prone in a coughing ﬁt for 1d6 rounds and is helpless during that time. Furthermore, on a failed save, the subject contracts ﬁlth fever (DMG 292). Creatures able to breathe water must make the Fortitude save in order to avoid the disease, but are otherwise unaffected.  SWORD OF DECEPTION  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Pale green blade of force Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Swinging a miniature replica of a sword as if it were real, you bring into being a full-sized representation of your replica madeentirelyofpalegreenforce.Theblade immediately attacks your enemy. You cause a blade of pale green force to appear and strike the opponent you designate, starting with one attack in the round when the spell is cast and continuing each round thereafter. Though it makes regular melee attacks, the sword strikes as a spell, not a weapon (and so can strike incorporeal creatures). A sword of deception always strikes from your direction, and so it can’t be used to ﬂank with your attacks, but it could ﬂank with your allies. The blade attacks with a base attack bonus equal to your caster level, dealing 1d8 points of damage per hit and threatening a critical hit on a roll of 19–20. In addition, each successful hit provides a  217  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  –2 penalty on the target’s next saving throw roll (–4 on a successful critical hit). This penalty is cumulative (to a maximum of –5 on a single creature) and lasts until the creature is forced to make a saving throw in a dangerous situation or receives the beneﬁt of a remove curse spell. Each round, a sword of deception continues to attack the previous round’s target unless you use a standard action to switch it to a new target within range. In any round when the weapon switches targets, it gets one attack as a standard action (as it does in the round when the spell is cast). The weapon can make multiple attack rolls against a single target with a full attack action if its base attack bonus permits. A sword of deception cannot be attacked or damaged (though it can be dispelled as any other spell). If an attacked creature has spell resistance, make a caster level check the ﬁrst time the sword attacks. If the check is successful, the sword can attack that creature with normal effect for the duration of the spell. If not, the sword of deception is dispelled. If the target goes beyond the spell range or out of your sight, the sword of deception returns to you and hovers. Focus: A miniature replica of a sword and a set of loaded dice.  SYMBOL OF SPELL LOSS Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 0 ft.; see text Effect: One symbol Duration: See text Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: No  Youtracethesymbolandfeelapullasittugs against the magical energy in your mind.  218  This spell functions like symbol of death (PH 289), except that when it is triggered, the symbol begins to attack the minds of spellcasters within 60 feet. Each must attempt a Will saving throw every round they are within range, at the beginning of their turn. Failure means that the highest-level spell prepared by the spellcaster (or highest-level spell slot, if the character casts spells spontaneously) is lost for  the day. The symbol remains active for 10 minutes per level or until it has erased ﬁfty levels of spells. The symbol attacks creatures with spell-like abilities as if they had spells, consuming a daily use of the highest-level ability the creature possesses, or suppressing an ability usable at will for 1 round.  SYMPHONIC NIGHTMARE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 6, cleric 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch; see text Target: Living creature touched; see text Duration: 24 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes A dark and ominous aura forms around youasyoucompletethespell.Distantchords of a harsh and terrible symphony—as if multipleorchestrasplayeddifferentpieces simultaneously—echocontinuouslyinthe air as you reach for your victim. A creature targeted by this spell loses the ability to dream during sleep or rest. Rather, in place of dreams, the subject’s slumbering mind is ﬁlled with the sounds of a discordant orchestra. After the victim’s ﬁrst attempt to sleep, it incurs a –2 penalty on Wisdom-based skill checks. This penalty persists as long as the symphonic nightmare maintains its hold. This spell affects all creatures that sleep or enter sleeplike trances, although creatures without the need to sleep are effectively immune. In addition, the creature’s sleep is now haunted. It can no longer gain complete rest from sleeping or resting. The subject does not regain hit points or heal ability damage naturally, nor is it able to prepare spells if doing so requires a full night’s rest. The creature is, however, now immune to the dream and nightmare spells, as well as to other effects that cause nightmares (such as the night hag’s dream haunting ability). You can lift the effect of this curse at will, but it is otherwise difﬁcult to  remove a symphonic nightmare before its duration expires. A remove curse cast at a higher caster level than the symphonic nightmare spell removes it, as does a successful break enchantment. Otherwise, a wish or miracle is required to lift the curse. This spell can also be cast on a creature you are scrying, or on a creature distant from you if you hold something the creature carried within the past 24 hours. Focus: A small statue of an opened skull, within which is arranged a miniature orchestra. The quality of this component must be extraordinary, and it carries a value of 1,000 gp.  SYNOSTODWEOMER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: One of your spells Duration: 1 round  You cast this spell, and you picture a forge in your mind. You think of the forge as you cast your next spell, but that spell does not manifest. Instead, your hands glow with a golden curative radiance. You channel the spell energy from a spell you know into healing magic. After you cast this spell, the next spell you cast in the same round is converted to positive energy. When you cast the second spell, you touch yourself or another creature, curing 1d8 points of damage for every spell level of the spell you cast. If the spell you cast was prepared with a metamagic feat, you use the level of the spell slot the spell occupied.  TACTICAL PRECISION  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You hold aloft a toy soldier and shake it at your allies, calling them to arms as you do so. The toy soldier dissipates, but you feel a connection to your allies as though you couldheareachonewhisperingherintended actions before she performed them.  Divination Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No From your clenched ﬁst you produce a luminousray.Theraypulsatesbetweenthe target creature and you. The ray acts as a rangeﬁnder for you and any allies. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. It provides a +1 insight bonus per three caster levels on ranged attacks directed at the subject for the duration of the spell. Your allies need not see you, but they must be able to see the ray. You can otherwise act normally for the duration of the spell. Allies who can see the target of the ray receive the bonus even if you lose line of sight to the target. Focus: A small metal or stone tube.  TELEPATHIC AURA  Divination Level: Paladin 4 Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 100 ft. Area: 100-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  You can mentally communicate with all allies within range, though this is one-way communication. (You can send thoughts, but you cannot receive thoughts in response.) Anything you choose to send is received by all creatures you perceive as allies within the emanation (you cannot send thoughts only to certain allies), and they all understand you regardless of language. Allies with Intelligence scores lower than 3 understand basic commands but not complex information (“Attack” is understood, but “Ignore the foot soldiers and attack the spellcasters” gets the same reaction as “Attack”).  TELEPATHIC BOND, LESSER  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Mind 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: You and one willing creature within 30 ft. Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you send your thoughts outward, your mindbrushesagainsttheconsciousnessof yourfriendanditwelcomesyou,forminga bond that no distance can break. You forge a telepathic bond with another creature with an Intelligence score of 6 or higher. You can communicate telepathically through the bond regardless of language. No special power or inﬂuence is established as a result of the bond. Once the bond is formed, it works over any distance (although not from one plane to another).  THORNSKIN  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M  You push a thorn against your skin to completethespell.Insteadofpiercingyour skin, the thorn melds into it. An instant later, hundreds of similar thorns sprout all over your body. Your skin sprouts thorns when this spell is cast, increasing the damage you deal with an unarmed strike and making you difﬁcult to grab. As well as dealing lethal damage with your unarmed strikes (if you don’t already do so), you deal an extra 1d6 points of piercing damage (so that a human under the effect of thornskin would deal 1d3 points of bludgeoning damage + 1d6 points of piercing damage with an unarmed strike). In addition, any creature that hits you with a natural weapon or unarmed strike (including all successful grapple checks) takes 5 points of piercing damage. A creature’s damage reduction, if any, applies to the damage from this spell. The damage from thornskin is treated as piercing for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Material Component: A thorn.  CHAPTER 1  TARGETING RAY  You make a silent gesture with your holy symbol and think about your fellowship with your companions. In a moment, they all look up as if someone called their names.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  When you cast this spell, you grant your allies greater insight into one another’s actions, allowing them to better coordinate their attacks. If two affected allies ﬂank the same creature, each gains a +2 insight bonus on melee attack rolls and deals an extra 1d6 points of damage against the ﬂanked creature. Creatures not subject to extra damage from sneak attacks are immune to this extra damage. Material Component: A toy soldier.  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  THUNDERHEAD  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Black mist forms near the ground and sweeps upward to join a small cloud formingabovethecreatureyoudesignateasyour target. Miniature peals of thunder erupt from the cloud. Thunderhead creates a small thundercloud over the subject’s head. The cloud moves with the subject, following it unerringly even if he becomes invisible or leaves the region. In every round of the spell’s duration, a miniature bolt of lightning leaps from the thundercloud  219  to strike the subject. Each bolt deals 1 point of electricity damage that is negated by a successful Reﬂex save. Material Component: A small piece of copper wire.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  THUNDERLANCE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A spearlike beam Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by D. Martin  A faint gray shimmering forceinthegeneralshapeof astafforspearspringsfrom your hand.  220  THUNDEROUS ROAR  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  the roar. Crystalline creatures take 1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d6).  TIDAL SURGE  Evocation [Water] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature or all creatures in a 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Anexplosionofwaterrushesoutfrom the point you designate, bowling over your enemies.  When you cast this spell, you create a huge wave of water When you cast this spell, that slams into one or more you create a deadly targets within range. If no lance of force. You can large, natural source of water freely make a thunder(a river, lake, or ocean) exists within the spell’s range, you lance retract or grow to can affect only one target. any length from 1 foot If such a source of water to 20 feet, but it always exists within the range of remains a straight lance of force. This effect gives the spell, the spell creates a you a natural reach of 20 burst centered on a location feet. You can use a thunyou designate. In either case, derlance to make powerful the water deals 1d6 points of melee attacks. damage per caster level (maxiYou can wield a thunmum 15d6) to the target or to derlance in one or two creatures within the burst. hands, dealing a base 3d6 In addition, all affected points of damage (crit creatures are subjected to a 20/×3). Instead of using bull rush attack, forcing them your Strength modiﬁer, to make opposed Strength The thunderhead spell seems a nuisance, but it can be deadly you use the higher of checks against the wave of your Intelligence modiﬁer or Charisma water. The water has a +5 bonus on Calling upon the lost voices of dead modiﬁer as a bonus on attack rolls and creatures, you cause the targeted area to the opposed Strength check, or a +10 damage rolls. bonus if the spell is cast near a source becomeﬁlledwiththeenragedroaringofa of water. You designate the direction If you successfully strike a target thousand dinosaurs. The ground beneath the area shakes with the sound. the wave pushes when you cast the protected by any force effect of 3rd level or lower, such as a shield or mage spell; creatures that lose the opposed armor spell, the thunderlance might The resulting blast of sound from the Strength check are pushed back 5 casting of thunderous roar can be heard feet, plus an additional 5 feet for every dispel the force effect in addition to 5 points by which the wave beats their for miles, but the spell affects only those damaging the target. Make a dispel Strength checks, in the chosen direcin its area. All creatures in the affected check against the level of the caster who created the effect. If you succeed, area take 1d6 points of sonic damage tion. It is possible for a wave arising the effect is dispelled. The thunderlance per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). from a body of water to push characters A successful Fortitude saving throw into the water. remains whether you succeed or fail on this check. halves the damage. Additionally, any The wave puts out torches, campﬁres, Material Component: A small metal creature that takes damage from this exposed lanterns, and other open spear. spell must make a Reﬂex saving throw ﬂames if they are carried by the target or be knocked prone from the force of or located within the area and they  are Large or smaller. If the wave hits a magical ﬁre, those ﬂames are targeted by a dispel magic effect as if you had cast the spell.  TIGER’S TOOTH  This spell functions like magic fang (PH 250), except as noted above.  TORTOISE SHELL  Transmutation Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) In the blink of an eye, the creature you touched grows the armor plating of a tortoise across its torso and a tough, leathery skin elsewhere. Tortoise shell grants a +6 enhancement bonus to the subject’s existing natural armor bonus. This enhancement bonus increases by 1 for every three caster levels beyond 11th, to a maximum of +9 at 20th level. The enhancement bonus provided by tortoise shell stacks with the target’s natural armor bonus, but not with other enhancement bonuses to natural armor. A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor of +0, much as a character wearing only normal clothing has an armor bonus of +0. Tortoise shell slows a creature’s movement as if it were wearing heavy armor. An elf subject to tortoise shell, for example, would have a speed of 20 feet and could run only 60 feet per round. The spell affects only a creature’s speed; tortoise shell doesn’t carry an armor check penalty or an arcane spell failure chance.  Your hand glows with roiling purple light as you reach out to deliver lunacy with your touch. You can cause one living creature to become dazed by making a successful touch attack. If the target creature does not make a successful Will save, its mind is clouded and it takes no actions for 1 round per caster level.  TOWERING OAK  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You evoke the power of the forests, giving yourself the ability to speak for them. You loom over others like a mighty tree dwarfs lesser plants. You draw on the oak’s strength to improve your ability to intimidate your enemies. You gain a +10 competence bonus on Intimidate checks and a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength.  TRAIN ANIMAL  Enchantment (Charm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) At last, you near the end of the spell’s complicated procedure. As the ﬁnal act of the ritual, you call out the tricks you wish toteachtheanimalyouaretouching.Your  While this spell is in effect, the affected animal gains a number of additional tricks equal to half your caster level (maximum ﬁve). This spell does not modify an animal’s attitude toward you, nor does it guarantee that an animal will cooperate when instructed to perform the newly learned tricks.  TRANSCRIBE SYMBOL Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Magic symbol touched Duration: 10 minutes or until discharged Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You speak quickly, and your animal companion glows brieﬂy, the glow focusing around its natural weapons.  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Madness 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  hand tingles for a moment as the spell takes effect.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Duration: 1 round  TOUCH OF MADNESS  Mimicking the marks of the sigil on the slateyouhold,yourenderyourselfimmune to detection by the magic symbol. You place a protective spell upon your hand that allows you to touch an untriggered magic sigil (such as a glyph of warding or a symbol of death) without setting it off. The touched sigil is removed from its location and held as magical potential on your hand, as though it were a touch spell. To pick up a sigil in this manner, you must make a successful caster level check (DC 20 + the target glyph’s spell level). Failure indicates that you have triggered the glyph or symbol. If you successfully transfer the sigil to your hand, you can use a standard action to place it on a surface (not a creature) of the sort on which it can normally be scribed. The transferred sigil works normally thereafter and retains all its original triggering conditions, although its current location might make its triggers difﬁcult or impossible to achieve. You can maintain the magic sigil on your hand as long as you concentrate. If your concentration lapses or the spell duration expires while the sigil is thus stored as potential, it immediately triggers upon you (and only you), even if you normally would not meet its trigger conditions. The effect has the  221  same saving throw and spell resistance as the original spell did. The only safe way to rid yourself of the stored sigil is to place it upon a suitable surface. Focus: A piece of slate that has been scoured bare and smooth on one side.  An affected creature that is attacked gains a new saving throw to break free of the enchantment. Material Component: A drop of pine resin.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  TRANSFIX  222  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a declaration, you ﬁnish your casting. Immediately, beings in the affected area cease moving, standing as still as statues. This spell causes any Medium or smaller humanoids within the area of the spell to become paralyzed. When casting the spell, you must specify a condition that will end it (“Wait here until the dragon arrives”), even if that condition can never feasibly be met (“Stay here until the sun shines at night”). Subjects in the area that fail their saves immediately become aware of the condition, but they cannot communicate it due to their paralyzed state (although someone could use a spell such as detect thoughts to ascertain the condition). For every hour the creatures are transﬁxed before the condition is met, they are allowed another saving throw to break free of the spell’s effect. As long as the spell operates, any Medium or smaller humanoid that enters its area must make a successful saving throw or become transﬁxed with the same exit conditions (they too become aware of the exit conditions on becoming transﬁxed). Likewise, any creatures removed from the area are freed from the spell’s effect.  dimension door spells (PH 221) and exchange appearances, as if using disguise self spells (PH 222) to appear as each other. Your target can negate this spell with a successful saving throw. If you or your target exceed the capacity of the dimension door spell or if you and your target have bodies that are so different that the disguise self spell could not disguise you as your target, this spell fails. Magic that penetrates disguises (such as true seeing) reveals the identities of you and your target. Otherwise, you are considered to be disguised as your target and vice versa for the duration of the spell. You get a +10 bonus on Disguise checks to impersonate the target. When the spell ends, you and your target revert to your true appearances in your current locations. You do not switch places again.  TRANSMUTE ROCK TO LAVA  Transcribe symbol allows a wizard to pick up and move a protective glyph  TRANSLOCATION TRICK  Conjuration [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: You and one creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You utter the words, and in an instant you and your target are switched—you take its positionandform,anditappearswhereyou hadstoodmomentsbefore,lookingtoothers as you appear. You and the other target switch locations, as if simultaneously using  Transmutation [Earth, Fire] Level: Druid 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: One 10-ft. cube Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: No Asyoureleasethespell’senergy,thetargeted areaofstoneinstantlyturnstomoltenlava, and the uncomfortable burning in your chest immediately ceases. You transform natural, uncut, or unworked rock of any sort into an equal volume of red-hot molten lava. All creatures in the spell’s area that make successful Reﬂex saves take 6d6 points of ﬁre damage, provided they can physically escape the area on their next turn. Creatures that fail their saves, or those unable to escape the area, take 20d6 points of ﬁre damage  The touched animal or magical beast gets a 20-foot enhancement bonus to its speed, and it can hustle without taking damage or becoming fatigued as long as the spell is in effect. While bearing  CHAPTER 1  You can detect copper, silver, gold, platinum, and gems within 30 feet, as well as differentiate between the ﬁve kinds of valuables. When you detect one of these types of valuables, the exact location of the source is not revealed—only its presence and direction. Whenever you come within 5 feet of the treasure, you can pinpoint its exact location. The spell can penetrate barriers, but 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt blocks it.  Illus. by W. England  With words of encouragement, you make the creature better able to handle the rigors of overland travel, at the expense of its ability to ﬁght.  Divination Level: Bard 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level A multihued glow of metallic colors surrounds you. The swirling glow manifests as a thin mist that forces itself up into your nose. Suppressing a sneeze, you note with excitement the unmistakable scent of treasure.  TREMOR  Evocation [Earth] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/3 levels Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No  TRAVELER’S MOUNT  Transmutation Level: Blackguard 1, druid 1, paladin 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Animal or magical beast touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  TREASURE SCENT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  in each round they remain in the area. Creatures in the lava have their speed reduced to 5 feet and take a –2 penalty on attack rolls and to Armor Class. Even after leaving the area of the spell, creatures that were exposed to the lava take half damage (either 3d6 or 10d6) for 1 additional round. If transmute rock to lava is cast upon the ceiling of a cavern or tunnel, the lava falls to the ﬂoor and spreads out in a 15-foot-radius pool at a depth of approximately 1-1/2 feet. The rain of lava deals 2d6 points of ﬁre damage to anyone caught directly beneath (Reﬂex half). In addition, creatures take 10d6 points of ﬁre damage each round when they are caught in the area of the pool. Although constructions of worked stone can’t be targeted with this spell, casting it on unworked stone below or adjacent to such structures deals 10d6 points of ﬁre damage per round to any part of the structure in contact with the lava. Wooden structures in contact with lava instantly burst into ﬂame. The lava cools naturally from its surface toward its center, and it no longer deals ﬁre damage after 2d6 hours as it slowly reverts to stone. Though a 15-foot-radius pool can take as long as two days to completely cool, the core of a 10-foot cube of lava might remain molten for a month or more. Magical or enchanted stone is not affected by the spell.  The treasure scent spell allows a spellcaster to sniff out riches  a rider, the mount no longer attacks in combat. The steed willingly bears its rider into battle; it just can’t use its own natural weapons for the duration of the spell.  Whenyoucastthisspell,asmall,localized tremor shakes the ground in the area. Detritus and loose debris rattle with the small quake, and creatures caught in the area stumble and fall. This minor quake is not strong enough to damage structures. The effect lasts for 1 round per three caster levels, during which time any spellcaster on the ground in the area must succeed on a Concentration check (DC 15 + spell level) or lose any spell she is casting. A  223  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  creature attempting to use a skill that would provoke attacks of opportunity (such as Disable Device, Heal, Open Lock, and Use Rope, among others) must succeed on a DC 15 Concentration check, or the action automatically fails and is wasted. Each creature in the area must make a Reﬂex save each round or be knocked prone.  TREMORSENSE  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) You cast this spell and know where each ofyouropponentsstands.Theirpresenceis marked in your mind like ripples radiating along the surface of a pond. You can automatically pinpoint the location of any object or creature within 30 feet that is in contact with the ground. Arcane Focus: A ﬂeck of skin from a creature that has tremorsense.  TRIADSPELL  Transmutation Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Youcompletethecasting,anddeepwithin your mind, you feel one of your prepared spells subdividing into three parts, each as powerful as its original. You alter one of your prepared spells so that you can cast it three times before it is expended. The prepared spell must be of 3rd level or lower, and once the triadspell is cast, you can cast the altered spell two additional times (a total of three times) before it is expended. The altered spell functions normally and requires components or XP for each use as if you were casting three separate spells. If you later choose to prepare a different spell in that spell slot, any extra castings provided by the triadspell are lost. You cannot cast  224  triadspell more than once upon a single prepared spell.  TRUE CREATION  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Creation 8 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 0 ft. Effect: Unattended, nonmagical object of nonliving matter, up to 1 cu. ft./level Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With one last invocation to your deity, you endthespellandbringintobeingtheobject you desire. You create a nonmagical, unattended object of any sort of matter. Items created are permanent and cannot be negated by dispelling magic or negating powers. For all intents and purposes, these items are completely real. The volume of the item created cannot exceed 1 cubic foot per caster level. You must succeed on an appropriate skill check to make a complex item, such as a Craft (bowmaking) check to make straight arrow shafts or a Craft (gemcutting) check to make a cut and polished gem. Unlike the items brought into being by the lower-level spells minor creation and major creation, objects created by the casting of true creation can be used as material components. Material Component: A small piece of matter of the same type of item you plan to create—a sliver of wood to create arrow shafts, a tiny piece of the appropriate stone to create a polished gem, and so forth. XP Cost: Half the item’s gold piece value in XP, or 50 XP, whichever is more.  TRUE DOMINATION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Domination 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One humanoid Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Reachingoutwithyourthoughts,yougrasp the mind of your foe and take command of its actions. You can control the actions of any humanoid. You establish a telepathic link with the subject’s mind. If a common language is shared, you can generally force the subject to perform as you desire, within the limits of its abilities. If no common language is shared, you can communicate only basic commands, such as “Come here,” “Go there,” “Fight,” and “Stand still.” You know what the subject is experiencing, but you do not receive direct sensory input from it. Subjects have a chance of resisting this control by making a Will save to avoid the effect when the spell is cast. Those affected by the spell and then forced to take actions against their nature receive a new saving throw with a –4 penalty. Obviously self-destructive orders might be carried out, unless the subject can make a saving throw with the –4 penalty. Once control is established, the range at which it can be exercised is unlimited, as long as you and the subject are on the same plane. You need not see the subject to control it. Protection from evil or a similar spell can prevent you from exercising control or using the telepathic link while the subject is so warded, but it does not prevent the establishment of domination or dispel it.  TSUNAMI  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: 20-ft./level-wide, 10-ft.-long, 40-ft.-high wave of water; see text Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial (object) Spell Resistance: No Theeldest,mostpowerfulforcesofelemental water heed your summons and obey your request. These forces of pure elemental power gather together a wall of water that moves inexorably in the direction of your choice, crushing all that it encounters.  TUNNEL SWALLOW  You unleash the power of this spell, and the walls of the tunnel begin to roil and shift on allsides,clenchinginrapidsuccessionasthey ﬂing your opponents down the hallway.  UNBINDING  Abjuration Level: Liberation 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: 180 ft. Area: 180-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by J. Engle  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: Tunnel section up to 20 ft. in diameter and up to 50 ft. long Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  You cause a section of tunnel to ﬂex with peristaltic convulsions, crushing its contents and moving them along its length in the direction you designate. Each creature and object in the affected tunnel section is crushed for 1d6 points of damage per level (maximum 15d6) and is moved from its former position to a point just outside the affected tunnel section. A creature that makes a successful Reﬂex saving throw takes only half damage and is moved halfway from its former position in the tunnel toward the designated end of the tunnel section. When the spell duration expires, the tunnel returns to its former shape and size, with no harm done to its structure. Tunnel swallow affects both worked and natural tunnels, as well as corridors in surface buildings, but does not harm the structure. Movement caused by this spell does not provoke attacks of -opportunity. Material Component: A lump of chewed vegetable or meat.  CHAPTER 1  Extracting a victim in this manner requires a DC 20 Strength check. A tsunami’s progress can be halted by anything that would normally block line of effect along its path, assuming the tsunami does not destroy the intervening object or creature. If only a portion of the tsunami is blocked, the rest of it continues on. Although this spell can be cast on dry land, it is most effective when cast on the open sea. In this case, saving throws to avoid full damage are made with a –4 penalty, and the width of the tsunami increases to 40 feet per caster level. A tsunami that begins on water but then travels onto land immediately shrinks to its land size and speed. A tsunami does not vanish if it moves beyond the spell’s initial range. Material Component: A crown of coral set with pearls (total value of at least 5,000 gp).  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell creates a towering tsunami and sends it forth in a powerful wave to smash all in its path. The tsunami starts at any point you select within range of the spell and then moves at a speed of 60 feet in any direction chosen by you. Once the direction is set, the tsunami cannot change course. The tsunami deals 1d6 points of bludgeoning damage per caster level (maximum 20d6) to all in its path. Anything struck can make a Fortitude saving throw for half damage. Gargantuan or larger creatures that fail the save are knocked prone. Huge or smaller creatures that fail the save are picked up and carried with the wave. Each round a victim is carried by the tsunami, it takes the bludgeoning damage again and can make an additional Fortitude save for half damage. Creatures being carried by a tsunami cannot move in any other way. They can otherwise act normally, but must make a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level) to cast a spell. Creatures caught in a tsunami take a –4 penalty to Dexterity and a –2 penalty on attack rolls. They can escape the wave by making successful DC 20 Swim checks, as long as they end their movement outside the effect of the tsunami. Any creature that comes in contact with a tsunami as a result of movement during its turn is considered to have been struck by the tsunami’s movement. A creature can attempt to extract another creature caught by a tsunami, providing the rescuer resists being swept up or knocked down by the tsunami and can reach the victim  A burst of white energy erupts from your body to destroy spells that contain, constrain, or seal.  The tsunami spell can wash the natural world clean of unbalancing force  225  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  An unbinding spell negates charm and hold spells of all types; arcane locks and similar closures; and spells that create physical or magical barriers, such as wall of ﬁre, wall of force, guards and wards, temporal stasis, and slow spells, among others. The effect of a statue spell is also ended, and a magic jar is shattered—forever destroyed—and the life force within snuffed out. In addition, any spell that holds magical effects, including other spells (magic mouth, imbue with spell ability, and so on), immediately releases them at a range of 0 feet. Protective spells such as protection from evil, shield, globe of invulnerability, and similar spells are not affected by an unbinding. Petriﬁed creatures are neither revealed nor restored. Individuals bound to service are not freed (including creatures such as familiars, invisible stalkers, genies, and elementals). An antimagic ﬁeld is not affected, nor does the effect of unbinding penetrate one. A magic circle against evil (or another alignment) that currently holds a creature imprisoned is dispelled. Curses and geas/quest spells are negated only if you are of a level equal to or greater than that of the original caster. All these effects occur without regard to the caster’s wishes. Spell effects on the person of the caster, or effects or items being carried or worn by the caster, remain undisturbed, but any others within the area are affected, including those of allies. The opening of locks or other closures triggers any alarms or traps attached to them. Any released creature might or might not be friendly to the caster. MaterialComponents:Alodestoneand a pinch of saltpeter.  UNDEAD BANE WEAPON  Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, paladin 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched or ﬁfty projectiles (all of which must be in contact with each other at the time of casting) Duration: 1 hour/level  226  Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) Your hand glows with a dull light, and whenyoutouchtheweapon,thelightshifts to it, so that it sheds a serene gray radiance as bright as a candle. You give a weapon the undead bane special ability in addition to any other properties it has. Against undead, your weapon’s enhancement bonus is 2 higher than normal, and it deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against undead. The spell has no effect if cast upon a weapon that already has the undead bane special ability. Alternatively, you can affect up to ﬁfty arrows, bolts, or bullets. The projectiles must be of the same kind, and they have to be together, such as in the same quiver. Projectiles, but not thrown weapons, lose their transmutation after one attack. The weapon is treated as goodaligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  UNDEAD LIEUTENANT  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One undead creature; see text Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youcastyourspellonthefoulcreature,and for a brief moment your own face appears atop its ruined body. You empower the subject undead with the authority of command over undead in your control. The targeted undead must have Intelligence 5 or higher. Undead under your control obey the target undead as if it were you. You can give orders to the undead normally, superseding the orders of the subject of this spell. The number of undead you can control is increased by an amount equal to your caster level as long as the undead lieutenant is active. If the target undead creature is destroyed, the spell ends.  You can have only one undead lieutenant at any time.  UNDEAD TORCH  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One corporeal undead/ level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You make a dark incantation and smash the ﬁreﬂy between your thumb and foreﬁnger. The undead bursts into blue ﬂames that do not burn. The subject creature deals an extra 2d6 points of damage on melee attacks against living creatures. If an attacked creature has spell resistance, the resistance is checked the ﬁrst time the undead subject attacks it. If your caster level check fails, the creature is unaffected by that casting of the undead torch. If the undead creature is destroyed, the undead torch continues to burn at the location of its destruction until the duration ends, and living creatures that pass through that area take 2d6 points of damage. If the undead creature assumes a nonphysical state (such as a vampire assuming gaseous form), the spell disperses harmlessly. Material Component: A living or dead ﬁreﬂy or glowworm.  UNDEATH’S ETERNAL FOE  Abjuration [Good] Level: Cleric 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/5 levels Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You invoke the power of good and indicate each of your party members in turn. A crystalblueauraspringsuparoundeachof them, fortifying them against the assaults of undead.  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Druid 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 5 rounds  You take up the mantle of the earth, gaining power over it as long as you stand upon or beneath its surface. While energized with the awesome power of this spell, you can choose a spell from those listed below  Transmutation Level: Bard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level When you cast this spell, a familiar and soothing song wells up in your mind. This spell brings to your mind a song that helps you retain your concentration. The song does not distract you from any task at hand—on the contrary, by humming along to the tune, you can focus your mind with ease. As long as this  UNHOLY STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Evil, Water] Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youcallupontheforcesofevil,andaheavy rain begins to fall in the area you indicate, its raindrops foul and steaming. A driving rain falls around you. It falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages good creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (good outsiders take double damage). Material Component: A ﬂask of unholy water (25 gp).  Illus. by L. Parillo  You invoke the mighty powers of the earth and it rises about you, limning you from below with brilliant green radiance. The power surges within your hands as you are invested with its might, and you bend that might to your own will.  UNDERSONG  spell is in effect, you can make a Perform check in place of a Concentration check.  CHAPTER 1  UNDERMASTER  once per round and use it as a spelllike ability. Using a spell in this way requires a standard action, even if the spell would normally have a longer casting time (such as move earth). The spells granted by undermaster are earth lock, earthquake, excavate, ﬂesh to stone, meld into stone, move earth, reverse gravity, soften earth and stone, statue,stoneshape,stonetell,stonetoﬂesh, transmute mud to rock, transmute rock to mud, tunnel swallow, wall of stone, and xorn movement. Material Component: A deep blue spinel worth 500 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You grant one or more creatures special abilities that allow them to effectively destroy undead. All subjects receive a death ward effect (PH 217). The subjects also have immunity to the special attacks and abilities of undead that deal ability damage, ability drain, fear effects, disease, paralysis, or poison. Targets can make melee and ranged attacks against ethereal or incorporeal undead as if they were using ghost touch weapons. They also gain a +4 sacred bonus to AC against attacks by undead.  UNLUCK  Divination Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Spewingacurseofbadluck,youﬂingapiece of broken mirror at your target. The mirror shard dissipates harmlessly as soon as it leaves your hand, and the sound of rolling dice is perceptible for an instant. When you cast this spell, you negatively inﬂuence the randomness of fortune for the target. Whenever the affected creature undertakes an action involving random chance (speciﬁcally, whenever any die roll is made for the  The undead torch spell lends an undead greater power to harm the living  227  creature, including attack rolls, damage rolls, and saving throws), two separate rolls are made and the worse result applied. A creature carrying a stone of good luck is immune to the effect of unluck. Material Component: A piece of a broken mirror.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  UNYIELDING ROOTS  Transmutation Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  and Will saves as long as the roots remain, but a –4 penalty on Reﬂex saves.  UPDRAFT  Conjuration (Creation) [Air] Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous  Illus. by W. O’Connor  228  Transmutation Level: Courage 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Pointing your holy symbol at your ally as you chant, you imbue him with ﬁghting spirit. The affected creature gains a +4 morale bonus to Strength and Constitution, and a +2 morale bonus on Will saves. In addition, when making a full attack, the affected creature can make one additional attack with any weapon it is holding. The attack is made using the creature’s full base attack bonus, plus any modiﬁers appropriate to the situation. This effect is not cumulative with similar effects, such as that provided by the haste spell.  The creature you touch grows thick tree roots that anchor it to the ground and provide it with lifesustaining healing. The creature you touch must be standing on or otherwise touching the ground for this spell to have an effect on it. For the duration of the spell, the touched creature can’t move from its current space, nor can it be moved from its space by bull rushes, overruns, magic such as Bigby’s forceful hand, or any effect short of a massive earthquake. Such attempts simply fail. If an overrun attempt is made against a creature with unyielding roots, the rooted creature must block rather than avoid the overrun. The rooted creature automatically wins the Strength check to stop the overrun and can make a Strength check (opposed by the overrunning creature’s Strength or Dexterity check) to knock the overrunning creature prone. The roots draw life energy from the ground that feed the touched creature, healing up to 30 points of damage per round, neutralizing poisons automatically, and wiping away negative levels (as the restoration spell). The touched creature gets a +4 bonus on Fortitude  VALIANT FURY  VEIL OF SHADOW  A druid can use the updraft spell to rise high above a battle  Detritus and loose debris on the ground beneathyoubeginstospinabout,caughtin asmallvortex.Thevortexquicklycoalesces intoacolumnofdirtygray-brownairthick enough to hold you aloft. Updraft conjures forth rushing air that propels you upward. You gain 10 feet per level of altitude, and then gently ﬂoat back down to the ground. At any point during your descent, you can move up to 5 feet laterally. Material Component: A miniature propeller or windmill.  Evocation [Darkness] Level: Assassin 2, blackguard 2, cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You speak the words of this spell, and tendrils of purple darkness rise from the ground, surrounding you and concealing you from your foes. Swirling wisps of darkness obscure your form, granting you concealment. The 20% miss chance is in effect even if the attacker has darkvision. This spell effect is dispelled in daylight or in the area of a light spell of 3rd level or higher. See invisibility does not counter a veil of shadow’s concealment effect, but a true seeing spell does.  VEIL OF UNDEATH  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 8, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  You gain many of the traits common to undead creatures. While the spell lasts, you have immunity to mind-affecting spells and abilities, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death, extra damage from critical hits, nonlethal damage, death from massive damage, ability drain, energy drain, fatigue, exhaustion, damage to physical ability scores, and any effect requiring a Fortitude save unless it is harmless or affects objects. You need not breathe, eat, or sleep. Like an undead creature, you are damaged by cure spells and healed by inﬂict spells. You don’t actually gain the undead type from casting this spell. Material Component: A ﬁnger from a zombie.  VIGOROUS CIRCLE  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 6, druid 6 Du ration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 40 rounds) This spell functions like mass lesser vigor, except as noted here and that it grants fast healing 3.  VIGOR, GREATER  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 5, druid 5 Duration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 35 rounds) This spell functions like lesser vigor, except as noted here and that it grants fast healing 4.  Illus. by L. Parrillo  This spell functions like lesser vigor, except as noted here and that it grants fast healing 2.  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Range: 20 ft. Target: One creature/2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Du ration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 25 rounds) This spell functions like lesser vigor, except that it affects multiple creatures.  VILE DEATH  VIGOR  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Duration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 25 rounds)  VIGOR, MASS LESSER  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 15 rounds) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, nor does it allow a creature to regrow or attach lost body parts. The effects of multiple vigor spells do not stack; only the highest-level effect applies.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Upon completion of the spell, you exhale your last breath and accept a brief embrace from death.  VIGOR, LESSER  The vile death spell grants an undead creature some of the power of a ﬁend  Thesoundsofbattleringinyourearsasyou lay hands on your fallen comrade. You can spareneithertimenormagictodomoreright now,butthebloodﬂowslowstoatrickleand herbreathingbecomeslesslabored,evenas you are called to the aid of another. The subject gains fast healing 1, enabling it to heal 1 hit point per round until the spell ends and automatically becoming stabilized if it begins dying from hit point loss during that time. Lesser vigor does not restore hit points  Conjuration (Calling) [Evil] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Target: One corporeal undead creature Duration: Permanent (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes The ground tears at your feet, and you can hear the distant screams of people in pain. Anunwholesomeredlightemanatesfrom the tear and coalesces into the translucent form of a ﬁend. It sneers at you as the earth closes, then it turns to look at the undead hostyouchoseasthespell’ssubject.Boththe undead and the ﬁend shudder as they meld together and the red glow dissipates.  229  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You summon the spirit of a ﬁend from the depths of the Nine Hells or the Abyss and bind it into the body of a corporeal undead creature—either a bodak, devourer, ghast, ghoul, mohrg, mummy, nightshade, skeleton, vampire, vampire spawn, wight, or zombie. Binding the ﬁend applies the ﬁendish template (MM 108) to the undead creature. The resulting creature is independent of you, and can act on its own. Its initial attitude toward you is indifferent. Material Component: A bit of brimstone and a bloodstone worth at least 500 gp. XP Cost: 100 XP.  VINE MINE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius/level spread Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdthecrownofivyleavesaloft,invoking the powers of nature, and an explosion of plant growth ﬁlls the area—plants over which you have control. You create and direct the rapid growth of vines. When you cast the spell, choose one of the following effects. • Climbing aid (treat as knotted ropes) • Bind helpless targets (Escape Artist DC 25 to escape) • Hamper movement (as heavy undergrowth) • Camouﬂage (add +4 competence bonus on Hide checks) As a standard action, you can redirect the vines’ growth (thus changing the effect). Material Component: A crown of ivy leaves.  VINE STRIKE  Divination Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, DF  230  Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round As you intone the sounds of the spell, your sight temporarily dims under a green gloom. An eyeblink later, the dimness disappears, and you feel a new connection withthenaturalorder,asifitweredirecting where to land your blow. While this spell is in effect, you have a special connection to the forces of nature that allows you to deliver sneak attacks on plant creatures as if they were not immune to sneak attacks. To attack a plant creature in this manner, you must still meet the other requirements for making a sneak attack. This spell applies only to sneak attack damage. It gives you no ability to affect plant creatures with critical hits, nor does it confer any special ability to overcome the damage reduction or other defenses of plant creatures.  VIPERGOUT  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: 1d4+3 summoned creatures Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Achurninginyourstomachovertakesyou asyoucompletethespell.Somethingslithers up your throat, and you vomit serpents. This spell summons 1d4+1 celestial or ﬁendish Medium vipers (MM 280), which leap forth from your mouth to attack your enemies. A celestial viper summoned by this spell has resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance 7; and a smite evil attack that provides a +2 bonus on one damage roll. A ﬁendish viper summoned by this spell has resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance 7; and a smite good attack that provides a +2 bonus on one damage roll. Starting in the round you complete the spell, you can spit three vipers as a  standard action or one viper as a move action. (Thus, if you move and then cast this spell, you cannot spit any vipers until your next turn, but if you cast this spell without moving, you can spit forth one viper as your move action in that round.) Spat vipers land at your feet in an adjacent square of your choice and act on the same round, on your turn, just as creatures summoned by a summon monster spell do. The snakes are not actually present in your mouth, and they do not interfere with your breathing. However, until you have brought forth all the snakes summoned by the spell, you cannot speak, cast spells with verbal components, or activate items that require speech. When the spell’s duration expires, all the vipers disappear, and any not yet brought forth are lost. When you use a summoning spell to summon a good creature or an evil creature, it is a spell of that type. Material Component: A snakeskin.  VISAGE OF THE DEITY Transmutation [Evil or Good] Level: Cleric 6, Mysticism 6  This spell functions like lesser visage of the deity, except that you take on many qualities of a celestial or ﬁendish creature, as follows. • You take on a shining, metallic appearance (for good clerics) or a more fearsome appearance (for evil clerics). • You gain the ability to smite evil (for good clerics) or good (for evil clerics) once a day. Add your Charisma modiﬁer to your attack roll and your character level to your damage roll against a foe of the appropriate alignment. • You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. • You gain resistance to acid 20, cold 20, and electricity 20 (for good clerics) or resistance to cold 20 and ﬁre 20 (for evil clerics). • You gain damage reduction 10/ magic. • You gain spell resistance 20. Your creature type does not change (you do not become an outsider).  VISAGE OF THE DEITY, GREATER Transmutation [Evil or Good] Level: Cleric 9, Competition 9, Mysticism 9, Puriﬁcation 9  Evil clerics undergo the following transformations. • You grow batlike wings that allow you to ﬂy at your normal speed (average maneuverability). • You gain +1 natural armor. • You gain bite and claw attacks. If you are size Medium or larger, your bite deals 1d6 points of damage and each claw attack deals 1d4 points of damage. If you are Small, your bite deals 1d4 points of damage and each claw attack deals 1d3 points of damage. • You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. • You gain immunity to poison. • You gain resistance to acid 10, cold 10, electricity 10, and ﬁre 10. • You gain damage reduction 10/ magic. • You gain spell resistance 25. • You gain the following bonuses to your ability scores: +4 Str, +4 Dex, +2 Con, +4 Int, +2 Cha.  As you end your prayer, you can feel the hand of your deity upon you. Your appearance reﬂects her divine power, and her touch grants you resistance from some of the damage of this world. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Charisma. You also gain resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10 if you are good, or resistance to cold 10 and ﬁre 10 if you are evil.  VISCID GLOB  Conjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes You speak the words of this spell and toss the small ball of silk in the air. It turns into a5-foot-wideglobofdripping,green-gray goo, and the sticky mass rockets toward your target. When you attack with a viscid glob, you make a ranged touch attack against the target. If you miss, the glob might strike a nearby square or creature (see Missing with a Thrown Weapon, PH 158). Once you have established the direction of the miss, roll 1d4 to determine the number of squares away from the target square that the glob lands. A Medium or smaller creature struck by the glob must make a successful Reﬂex save or be instantly stuck in place. A stuck creature can speak but is otherwise limited to purely mental actions (such as casting spells with no somatic or material components) and attempts to free itself by means of a Strength check  CHAPTER 1  • You grow feathered wings that allow you to ﬂy at twice your normal speed (good maneuverability). • You gain +1 natural armor. • You gain low-light vision. • You gain resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10. • You gain immunity to disease. • You gain a +4 racial bonus on saving throws against poison. • You gain damage reduction 10/ magic. • You gain spell resistance 25. • You gain the following bonuses to your ability scores: +4 Str, +2 Dex, +4 Con, +2 Int, +4 Wis, +4 Cha.  Transmutation [Evil or Good] Level: Blackguard 4, cleric 3, Mysticism 3, paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  or Escape Artist check (against a DC equal to this spell’s DC) made as a full-round action. A Large or larger creature stuck in the goo can’t move from the spot where it is glued, but it can otherwise act normally. The glob dissipates when the spell duration expires. Until then, it remains sticky, and any creature touching it (for example, a creature attempting to pull out an ally) must make a successful Reﬂex save or become stuck itself. A creature stuck by such secondary contact is not trapped as thoroughly as a creature targeted by the glob, however, so the DC of the Strength check or Escape Artist check required to get free is reduced by 5. Material Component: A tiny ball of spider silk.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like lesser visage of the deity, except that you take on many qualities of a half-celestial or half-ﬁendish creature. Your creature type changes to outsider for the duration of the spell. Unlike other outsiders, you can be brought back from the dead if you are killed in this form. Good clerics undergo the following transformations.  VISAGE OF THE DEITY, LESSER  VISION OF GLORY  Divination Level: Cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute or until discharged Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You touch your ally, and her eyes mist over momentarily. You know she is seeing an image of her deity, imploring her to battle in his name. You give the subject creature a brief vision of a divine entity that is giving it support and inspiring it to continue. The creature gets a morale bonus equal to your Charisma modiﬁer on a single saving throw. It must choose to use the bonus before making the roll to which it applies. Using the bonus discharges the spell.  VITRIOLIC SPHERE  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  231  Illus. by W. Reynolds  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Although a safe zone exists at the center of a vortex of teeth, some creatures are too large to take advantage of it  Atthesuccessfulcastingofthespell, you conjure a sizzling emerald sphere. Thesphereimmediatelyshatters,drenching all in the area with a potent acid. Affected creatures take 6d6 points of acid damage. Creatures that succeed on their Reﬂex saving throws take half of this damage. Creatures that fail their Reﬂex saves take full damage, and also take 6d6 points of acid damage in each of the following 2 rounds. Material Component: A tiny glass vial ﬁlled with aqua regia.  VOICE OF THE DRAGON Transmutation Level: Bard 4, Dragon 4, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  As you speak the words of the spell and inscribe the motions in the air, your voice deepens,takingonaresonancethatmakes the listener think of authority, power, and great age. You gain a +10 enhancement bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate  232  checks. You also gain the ability to speak and understand (but not read) Draconic. At any time before the spell’s duration expires, you can use a standard action to target a creature with a suggestion effect, which functions identically to the spell of that name (PH 285), including range, duration, and other effects. Doing this causes the voice of the dragon spell to end, though the suggestion itself lasts for the normal duration thereafter. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  VORTEX OF TEETH  Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Hollow cylinder (40-ft. radius, 20 ft. high, with a 5-ft.-radius safe zone at the center) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  A huge school of transparent piranhas swims rapidly through the air in the area you indicate. These magic ﬁsh are made of forceandtearintothebodiesofcreaturesas though ravenous. Creatures in the area take 3d8 points of damage per round at the beginning of your turn. Because this spell is a force effect, it harms incorporeal creatures. Material Component: A ﬁsh tooth.  VULNERABILITY  Transmutation Level: Assassin 4, cleric 5, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You invoke the power of this spell and a purple mist swirls around your opponent, weakening its mystic protections. This spell lowers the subject’s damage reduction by 5 (to a minimum of 5). For instance, if you successfully cast vulnerability on a dragon with damage  reduction 10/magic, its damage reduction becomes 5/magic. For every four caster levels beyond 9th, the subject’s damage reduction lowers by an additional 5: a reduction of 10 at caster level 15th and a reduction of 15 at caster level 19th.  WAIL OF DOOM  WALL OF EVIL  Abjuration [Evil] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4  You unleash a terrible cry of malice and anger. The very air darkens with black energy as your cry echoes away from you.  You invoke the abjuration and a wall of red and black energy springs up, only to fade away to invisibility.  Anyone caught in the area of this spell suffers excruciating pain and becomes demoralized. Each creature takes 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d4) and becomes panicked for 1 round per caster level. A successful Will save halves the damage, reduces the panicked effect to shaken, and reduces the duration of the shaken effect to 1 round.  This spell functions like wall of good (see below), except that good creatures are blocked.  WALL OF CHAOS  Abjuration [Chaotic] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 You invoke the abjuration, and a wall of multicoloredenergyspringsup,becoming translucent and vanishing in a ﬂash. This spell functions like wall of good (see below), except that lawful creatures are blocked.  WALL OF DISPEL MAGIC Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  WALL OF GEARS  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Mechanus 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall of moving gears whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level; see text Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No You pop the gear into your mouth and make a humming, buzzing incantation. The sound takes on a life of its own, and springing from the ground is a huge wall madeofmachinery,allspinning,clattering and moving about, endangering all who are close to it. This spell creates a 6-inch-thick wall of moving iron cogs, wheels, gears, pistons, and assorted mechanical parts. Each 5-foot square of the wall’s surface has hardness 10 and 90 hit points. Both sides of the wall have hundreds of moving parts that ﬂail out, dealing 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 15d6) to all creatures  WALL OF GLOOM  Illusion (Shadow) [Darkness, Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  This spell creates a transparent, permeable barrier. Anyone passing through it becomes the target of a dispel magic effect (PH 223) at your caster level. A summoned creature targeted in this way can be dispelled by the effect. A wall of dispel magic cannot be seen or felt by ordinary means, or even with a see invisibility spell. Detect magic indicates the presence of the effect, and true seeing reveals its presence.  within 10 feet. A successful Reﬂex save halves this damage. Material Component: A small gear.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 5 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous + 1 round/ level or 1 round; see text Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  You cast the spell and a translucent wall springs up, a shimmering ﬁeld of faded colorsthatswirlsandmergeswithitselflike the surface of a soap bubble.  Rubbing the ﬂeece between your ﬁngers, you hold up your hand and shout an arcane word. In an instant, a wall of dark shadow appears in the indicated location. Dark whispers,barelyperceptible,constantlyissue forth from the far side of the wall, causing a cold chill to run up your spine. You create a barrier of ominous shadow that obscures vision and blocks line of sight, including darkvision. The wall is insubstantial, so creatures can move through it without penalty. Wall of gloom counters or dispels any light spell of equal or lower level. Material Component: A bit of ﬂeece from a black sheep.  WALL OF GOOD  Abjuration [Good] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 5 ft./2 levels Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes Youinvoketheabjuration,andacascadeof brilliant white energy springs up in a wall that becomes invisible almost instantly. You create an immobile barrier that inhibits evil creatures. An evil summoned creature cannot pass through the wall in either direction, and any other evil creature must suc-  233  This spell functions like wall of good (see above), except that chaotic creatures are blocked.  WALL OF LIGHT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 5 ft./2 levels Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text  Illus. by D. Martin  Ablindingﬂashaccompaniesthecompletion of this spell as a wall of pure light springs into being.  A wall of gears strikes those who try to break though it  ceed on a Will save each time it attempts to move through the wall. If the saving throw is failed, the creature’s movement is stopped, and it can take no other action that round. A wall of good must be continuous and unbroken when formed. If it is cast so that an object or creature breaks its surface, the spell fails. ArcaneMaterialComponent:Powdered silver worth 25 gp.  WALL OF GREATER DISPEL MAGIC  Abjuration Level: Cleric 8, sorcerer/wizard 8  234  You cast the spell and a translucent wall springs up, its shimmering ﬁeld pulsing with strong, malignant shades than spin and twist into each other. This spell functions like wall of dispel magic (see above), except that the effect is that of greater dispel magic (PH 223).  WALL OF LAW  Abjuration [Lawful] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 You invoke the abjuration, and a wall of translucentsilverenergyspringsupbefore fading away to nothingness.  This spell causes a wall of dazzling yellow-white light to come into being at any point within range. The wall is opaque to all other creatures, though you can see through it without difﬁculty. A wall of light has no physical substance and does not otherwise hinder attacks, movement, or spells passing through it, although it blocks line of sight for other creatures. A creature that passes through a wall of light becomes dazzled for the duration of the spell. Spell resistance applies when passing through the wall. Sightless creatures and those already dazzled are not affected by passing through a wall of light. A wall of light sheds light equivalent to a daylight spell. Wall of light counters or dispels any darkness spell of equal or lower level. Material Component: A pinch of powdered sunstone.  WALL OF LIMBS  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A wall of whirling limbs up to 20 ft. long/level, or a ring of whirling limbs with a radius of up to 5 ft./2 levels, either form 20 ft. high Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  WALL OF SAND  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Cleric 4, druid 5, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level (S) Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a rush of hot air, a swirling wall of blowing sand leaps into being. This spell conjures up a 10-foot-thick, viscous, opaque wall of swirling sand.  WALL OF SMOKE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level (S) Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: No You wave your hand in a circular motion, and black smoke swirls into existence as a dark wall. This spell creates a thin wall of black smoke. The wall is stationary once created. The wall blocks sight to a limited degree. Creatures on opposite sides of the wall that cannot see over it gain concealment from each other. A creature can pass through a wall of smoke, but it must make a Fortitude save to avoid being nauseated for 1 round.  WALL OF WATER  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level (S) Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  An immobile, vertical curtain of whirling limbs springs into existence. The limbs resemble your own forelimbs. A creature attempting to move through the wall takes 5d6 points of damage and must succeed on a DC 18 Strength check or become stuck within the wall and unable to move (a charging creature gains a +2 bonus on the Strength check). The creature takes 5d6 points of damage each round at the beginning of your turn until freed. A creature can free itself with a DC 18 Strength check, or by dealing 30 points of damage to a 5-foot section of wall. A creature that starts its turn next to a wall of limbs must succeed on a DC 18 Strength check or be grabbed by the ﬂailing arms and become stuck, as above. If you evoke the wall so that it appears where creatures are, each creature takes damage as if passing through the wall. Each such creature can avoid the wall (ending up on the side of its choice) and thus take no damage by making a successful Reﬂex save. A wall of limbs provides cover against attacks made through it.  A moderate wind (11+ mph), such as from a gust of wind spell, destroys the wall in 1 round. This spell does not function underwater.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  By ﬂexing your arm and speaking the repetitive words of power, you unleash the spell.Inthedistance,thegroundiscovered in a writhing mass. As you watch, over the courseofafewseconds,thewrithingmass rises up and forms a wall of thousands of wriggling arms resembling your own.  The spell must be cast so that it rests on a solid surface. Once cast, the wall is immobile. The sand is sufﬁciently thick to block ranged attacks, providing normal cover appropriate for its size, but creatures can attempt to force their way through it. Moving through a wall of sand is difﬁcult, requiring a full-round action and a Strength check. A creature moves 5 feet through a wall of sand for every 5 points by which its Strength check result exceeds 10. Creatures within a wall of sand are considered blinded and deafened, and they are unable to speak or breathe. Thus, they might begin to suffocate (DMG 304) if they remain within the wall too long. Spells with verbal components cannot be cast within the wall, and any other spell requires a successful Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level). Creatures with reach can attempt to attack through the wall, but targets have total concealment and total cover, and the attacker must have a general idea where the target is located. Any open, unprotected ﬂame thrust into a wall of sand is instantly extinguished. Arcane Material Component: A handful of sand.  Awallspringsupintheareayoudesignate. Composed of a sheet of water rising vertically,thetransparentwalldoesnotprevent youfromseeingbeyondit.Thewaterofthe wall is calm as a lake on a windless day. This spell creates a 10-foot-thick wall of fresh water or seawater (as selected by you). The water forms around objects and creatures in its area, plunging these creatures and objects underwater. A creature in the area where the water is created can make a Reﬂex save to move to a random side of the wall before it forms completely. This movement must occur on the creature’s next turn, or it immediately suffers the full effect of being in the wall. Creatures can move through a wall of water by making Swim checks, or can walk along the ﬂoor at half speed; the water itself is considered to be calm water. Any open ﬂames in the area when the water forms are immediately extinguished. Creatures with the ﬁre subtype take 2d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level each round they remain partially or wholly in the wall. Although the wall is transparent, it provides cover to any targets inside against attacks launched from outside the wall. It cannot be destroyed by physical damage, nor can it be drained off to a different location. Water brought out of the wall in a container instantly evaporates as the wall itself forms more water to replace what was removed. Material Component: A sponge.  235  WAR CRY  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round You jab your weapon into the air as if in triumph, letting out a cry of victory before you have even made your attack. Foes aroundyouseemsurprisedbyyourdisplay even as the feeling grows within you that you cannot fail.  Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: No Water whirls into the air, swirling upward with a thunderous noise like a tornado of ﬂuid. Waterspout causes water to rise up into a whirling, cylindrical column. You can direct the movement of the waterspout as a move action.  Illus. by C. Frank  You gain a +4 morale bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls made as part of a charge. If you deal damage with a charge attack, your foe must succeed on a Will save or become panicked for 1 round (spell resistance applies to this effect).  WARNING SHOUT  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Paladin 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: 30 ft. Targets: All allies within 30 feet Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You shout a few words imbued with power by your faith, and your next words ring out clearandfardespiteothernoiseorintervening barriers. All allies within range are no longer considered ﬂat-footed, even if they have not yet acted in the current combat. Anyone sleeping naturally (as opposed to magically induced sleep, such as from a sleep spell) within the area is woken by a warning shout.  WATERSPOUT  236  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 7, Ocean 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: Cylinder (5-ft. radius, 80 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level  damage. Medium or smaller creatures that fail their saves are sucked into the spout and held suspended in its powerful currents, taking 2d6 points of damage each round (no save). Trapped creatures remain inside for 1d3 rounds before the waterspout ejects them out the top of the spout, and they fall back to the surface (taking 8d6 points of falling damage) 1d8×5 feet from the base of the waterspout. Waterborne creatures or objects within 10 feet of the spout (below and on all sides) also must make successful Reﬂex saves or be sucked into the spout if they are Medium or smaller. Anything sucked into the spout takes 3d8 points of damage and is then trapped for 1d3 rounds as described above. Only the smallest of watercraft, such as canoes, kayaks, or coracles, can be sucked into the spout. The occupant of any such craft can make a Profession (sailor) check instead of a Reﬂex save if it so chooses to avoid being sucked up.  WAVE OF GRIEF  With a war cry spell, a roar of triumph brings victory closer  A waterspout moves at a speed of 30 feet. You can concentrate on controlling the waterspout’s every movement or specify a simple program, such as move straight ahead, zigzag, circle, or the like. Directing a waterspout’s movement or changing its programmed movement is a move action for you. A waterspout always moves during your turn in the initiative order. If the waterspout exceeds the spell’s range, it collapses and the spell ends. A waterspout batters creatures and objects it touches, and it often sucks them up. Any creature or object that comes in contact with it must succeed on a Reﬂex save or take 3d8 points of  Enchantment [Evil, Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, blackguard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Emitting a mournful wail, you send out a pulse of magic imbued with sorrow and sadness. All within the cone when the spell is cast take a –3 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks. Material Component: Three tears.  WEAPON OF ENERGY  Transmutation [see text] Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One weapon  Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (object, harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) Yourhandglowsslightly.Withatouch,you transfer the glow from your hand onto the intended weapon.  Transmutation Level: Bard 3, cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One bludgeoning weapon or ﬁfty bludgeoning projectiles, all of which must be in contact with one another at the time of casting Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) You pass your hands over the weapon, and its head glows with a blue-gold radiance.  Transmutation Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, paladin 3 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object)  Wielding the weapon your deity favors, you call upon that divine force to imbue it with power. You must be holding your deity’s favored weapon to cast this spell. You can use the weapon as if you had proﬁciency with it even if you normally do not. The weapon gains a +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls and an additional special ability (see the list below). A double weapon gains this enhancement bonus and special ability for only one of its two ends, as chosen by you. When you reach caster level 9th, the enhancement bonus of the weapon increases to +2. At 12th level, the bonus rises to +3, at 15th level it is +4, and at 18th level it becomes +5. The list below includes deities from the core pantheon as well as other deities described in D&D supplements, along with the ﬁve alignment components. If a cleric worshiping a different deity casts this spell, the DM should assign an appropriate weapon special ability of the same power level as those given here. Deities Bahamut: +1 frost heavy pick Boccob: +1 spell storing quarterstaff Corellon Larethian: +1 keen longsword  CHAPTER 1  WEAPON OF IMPACT  WEAPON OF THE DEITY  Ehlonna: +1 frost longsword Erythnul: +1 mighty cleaving morningstar Fharlanghn: +1 defending quarterstaff Garl Glittergold: +1 throwing battleaxe Gruumsh: +1 returning shortspear Heironeous: +1 shock longsword Hextor: +1 mighty cleaving heavy flail Kord: +1 mighty cleaving greatsword Kurtulmak: +1 shock shortspear Lolth: +1 keen whip Moradin: +1 throwing warhammer Nerull: +1 keen scythe Obad-Hai: +1 defending quarterstaff Olidammara: +1 keen rapier Pelor: +1 flaming heavy mace St. Cuthbert: +1 mighty cleaving heavy mace Vecna: +1 frost dagger Wee Jas: dagger of venom Tiamat: +1 flaming heavy pick Yondalla: +1 defending short sword  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You cause a weapon to gain the ability to deal energy damage in addition to its other abilities, similar to how a ﬂaming burst weapon deals extra ﬁre damage on a hit or a critical hit. The weapon can deal acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre damage, chosen by you at the time of casting. The weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage of that energy type on a successful hit. On a critical hit, the weapon deals an additional 1d10 points of energy damage. If the weapon’s critical multiplier is ×3, add 2d10 points of energy damage instead, and if the multiplier is ×4, add 3d10 points of energy damage. This spell can be cast on a weapon that already deals energy damage, and if the weapon already creates the same type of damage as the spell, the effects stack. For example, if cast on a +1 ﬂaming longsword to give it additional ﬁre damage, the weapon now deals an extra 2d6 points of ﬁre damage per hit. This spell has a descriptor that is the same as the energy created by the target weapon. For example, weapon of energy is a ﬁre spell when used to give a weapon bonus ﬁre damage.  This spell makes a bludgeoning weapon have greater impact, improving its ability to deal telling blows. This transmutation doubles the threat range of the weapon. If the spell is cast on sling bullets or other bludgeoning projectiles, the weapon of impact effect on a particular projectile ends after one use, whether or not the missile strikes its intended target. Multiple effects that increase a weapon’s threat range, such as the Improved Critical feat, don’t stack.  Alignments Good: +1 frost warhammer Evil: +1 mighty cleaving light flail Neutral: +1 defending heavy mace Law: +1 flaming longsword Chaos: +1 shock battleaxe  WEAPON SHIFT  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One melee weapon of up to 15 lb. Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Wavingthefoldedsheetofparchmentbefore you,youﬁrmlygraspthetargetweapon.A barelyperceptiblerust-brownglowengulfs it, then grows into a shining radiance of molten-metalred.Astheradiancesubsides, you note with satisfaction that the weapon now has the desired shape. A weapon shift spell allows you to temporarily transform any one melee weapon into a different melee weapon. Thus, a greatclub could be transformed into a greatsword, a light pick into a morning star, or a dagger into a battleaxe. Improvised weapons and double weapons cannot be targeted or be the result of this spell. Magic weapons transformed retain all their special abilities as long as the new form could legally have those abilities, and weapons  237  made from special materials retain their special materials. Material Component: A piece of parchment folded into the shape of the weapon type desired.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  WEATHER EYE  Divination Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 1 mile + 1 mile/level Area: 1-mile radius + 1-mile/level centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You speak the words of power, and a warm orange ﬁre radiates from you, aiding those that believe in the true balance, and harming all others.  Illus. by J. Engle  Using your connection to the divine forces and nature, you gaze into your scrying deviceandsummonimagestomindofwhat the future holds for the weather. You can accurately predict the natural weather up to one week into the future. If unnatural forces currently affect the weather, then weather eye reveals the spells or abilities in effect, though not the source of those abilities. Material Component: Incense. Focus: A scrying device of some kind (bowl, mirror, crystal ball, and so forth).  WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE Necromancy Level: Balance 9 Components: V  238  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Creatures in a 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  This spell harms or heals creatures within its area based on their alignments and life status. The effect does the most harm to those creatures most extreme in alignment and most out of balance with the natural world. For living creatures that have an alignment with no neutral component (LG, CG, LE, or CE), this spell acts as an inﬂict critical wounds spell (PH 244). For living creatures that have an alignment with a neutral component and one other (NG, LN, CN, or NE), this spell acts as an inﬂict moderate wounds spell (PH 244). For living creatures that have a neutral alignment (N) and all undead creatures, this spell acts as a heal spell (PH 239), dealing damage to undead but acting as a beneﬁcial spell to neutral creatures.  WHIRLING BLADE  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  A whirling blade makes attacks against many foes  Range: 60 ft. Effect: 60-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With weapon in hand, you ﬁnish the last of thearcanegesturesandwordsthatactivate the power of the spell. As you cast the spell, you hurl a single slashing weapon at your foes.Theblade,carriedalongbothbyyour mightandyourmagicalprowess,slashesat your foes while whirling forward. You hurl a weapon held at the time of casting, and it magically attacks all enemies along a line to the extent of the spell’s range. You make a normal melee attack, just as if you were attacking with the weapon in melee, against each foe in the weapon’s path, but you can choose to substitute your Intelligence modiﬁer or your Charisma modiﬁer (as appropriate for your spellcasting class) for your Strength modiﬁer on the weapon’s attack rolls and damage rolls. Even if your base attack bonus would normally give you multiple attacks, a whirling blade gets only one attack (at your best attack bonus) against each target. The weapon deals damage just as if you had swung it in melee, including any bonuses you might have from ability scores or feats. No matter how many targets your weapon hits or misses, it instantly and unerringly returns to your hand after attempting the last of its attacks. Focus: A slashing melee weapon that you hurl.  WHIRLWIND, GREATER  This spell is a more potent version of whirlwind (PH 301). A greater whirlwind affects creatures differently, depending on their size and where they are in relation to the twister. Near the Tornado: Large or smaller creatures who start their turn within 60 feet of the center of a greater whirlwind must succeed on a Fortitude save or be dragged 1d4×10 feet toward the center of the twister, taking 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet dragged. Huge creatures within 40 feet of the twister must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked prone. Gargantuan and Colossal creatures within 40 feet of the twister must succeed on a Fortitude save before moving away from the twister. Flying creatures of Huge size or smaller that fail their Fortitude saves are sucked to the center of the twister, taking 2d6 points of damage from the battering and buffeting. Gargantuan ﬂying creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be pulled 1d6×10 feet toward the center of the twister. Colossal ﬂyers must likewise make Fortitude saves or be pulled 1d6×5 feet toward the twister’s center. Any Huge or smaller creature that comes in contact with the spell effect must succeed on a Reﬂex save or take 3d6 points of damage. A Large or smaller creature that fails its ﬁrst save must succeed on a second one or be picked up bodily by the cyclone and held suspended in its powerful winds. Any creature picked up is ejected 3 rounds later. Inside the Tornado: Creatures that start their turn inside the tornado take  WILD RUNNER  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) A vibrant green glow surrounds you, and you feel your body begin to change shape. You grow several inches in height and become aware of a bending and lengthening of your spine. Glancing back, you see a second pair of hoofed legs and a swishing tail. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a centaur (MM 32). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to monstrous humanoid, and your size changes to Large. You have the space and reach of a centaur (10 feet/5 feet). You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average centaur (Str 18, Dex 14, Con 15), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your  WIND AT BACK  Evocation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 12 hours Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  CHAPTER 1  Wind whips into a frenzy and becomes a tornado that wreaks destruction as you direct, ﬂinging your foes into the air and destroying nearby structures.  base land speed becomes 50 feet. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You can still use any extraordinary, spell-like, and supernatural abilities possessed by your normal form. You gain all the advantages of a quadruped form (greater carrying capacity, +4 bonus to resist trip attacks, and so on); this includes the ability to ﬁght effectively while carrying a rider. You can still use your equipment and cast spells normally.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation [Air] Level: Druid 9, Windstorm 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 20-ft.-radius tornado, up to 5 ft./level high, centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  6d6 points of damage for each round they remain inside at the beginning of your turn. Creatures inside the tornado can’t do much; attacks, spellcasting, and movement are impossible within a greater whirlwind. When the greater whirlwind ejects a creature, it reappears 4d6×5 feet away from the twister’s center in a random direction, and 4d6×5 feet off the ground (immediately falling if it can’t ﬂy). Terrain and Structures: The tornado uproots trees and other vegetation automatically, and it leaves a trail of dense rubble (DMG 90) wherever it goes. Structures within a greater whirlwind take 2d6×10 points of damage per round. In a round or two, that amount of damage is sufﬁcient to destroy any building made of materials less sturdy than reinforced masonry. No ranged attacks can pass through the twister. A greater whirlwind extinguishes all ﬂames it touches. Listen checks are impossible within a greater whirlwind. A greater whirlwind remains stationary unless you direct it elsewhere as a move action. It moves up to 60 feet per round.  Youintonethewordsthatwillgiveyouand your allies speed and stamina for the long journeyahead.Yourcompanionsarebathed in a soft green radiance as the spell is cast. This spell doubles the overland speed (PH 164) of all subjects, assuming they are all traveling together in the same direction, including pack animals and mounts. This spell does not affect nonliving material. The spell does not affect tactical speed.  WIND TUNNEL  Evocation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You evoke the powers of the sky, and the wind picks up around you. It blows from your back, now, and wraps itself around your allies’ missiles, sending them to their targets more surely. You call on the wind to assist your allies’ accuracy. A wind tunnel improves  239  the accuracy of your allies’ ranged weapons, granting each subject a +5 competence bonus on ranged attacks. Further, it doubles the range increment of these weapons.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  WINGBIND  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Theﬂyingcreatureletsoutasurprisedhowl andthenplummetstotheground,itswings ﬂat against its body and struggling against a green glowing net. A web of force surrounds the target, entangling it like a net. This spell functions like earthbind (page 76), except that an ensnared creature immediately falls to the ground, taking falling damage. An entangled creature can escape with a successful Escape Artist check against a DC equal to the save DC of the spell. Like a wall of force (PH 298), this web of force is impervious to most attacks: It is immune to damage of all kinds, cannot be burst with  a Strength check, and is unaffected by most spells, including dispel magic. Also like a wall of force, the web is immediately destroyed by disintegrate, a rod of cancellation, a sphere of annihilation, or Mordenkainen’s disjunction.  WINGED MOUNT  Transmutation Level: Blackguard 4, paladin 4 Component: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Your touched special mount Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youtouchyourspecialmountanditsprouts giant, feathery white wings. This spell grants your special mount a ﬂy speed of 60 feet (good). The mount is slowed as normal because of weight carried, barding worn, and environmental factors.  WINGS OF AIR  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch  Target: Winged creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: No (harmless) Youplaceyourhandonthecreature’sshoulders,andawarmyellowradianceinfusesit, spreading out to the tips of its wings. The creature you touch becomes more agile in the air, able to make quicker turns, and more maneuverable when ﬂying. The subject must be capable of ﬂight using wings. The creature’s maneuverability improves by one grade—from clumsy to poor, poor to average, average to good, or good to perfect. A single creature cannot beneﬁt from multiple applications of this spell at one time.  WINGS OF AIR, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 This spell functions like wings of air, except that the creature’s maneuverability improves by two grades—from clumsy to average, poor to good, or average to perfect.  WINGS OF THE SEA  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  240  The wind tunnel spell guides ranged attacks to their targets  Thewebbingbetweenyourﬁngersgrowsto reachyourﬁngertipsasyoucompletethespell.  In the instant you touch the spell’s intended subject,however,thewebbingbetweenyour ﬁngersreturnstonormalevenasthesubject’s means of watery movement grow.  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Deathbound 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Limbs of one humanoid Duration: Permanent  WOOD ROT  WINTER’S EMBRACE  A target that fails its save takes 1d8 points of cold damage per round at the beginning of your turn. Each round, the subject can make a new Fortitude saving throw to avoid taking damage  Wood rot destroys wooden items and harms plant creatures  Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Uttering a rumbling phrase, you point at yourfoeandwatchwithdelightasitslimbs wither and twist, becoming useless. You choose to wither either the arms or the legs of a humanoid. Withered legs force a subject to fall prone while at the same time reducing the subject’s land speed to 5 feet. Withered arms make it impossible for the subject to use objects or cast spells with somatic components. A withered limb can be restored to  Illus. by C. Dien  Your successful melee touch attack deals 1 point of Strength damage and 1 point of Constitution damage per two caster levels to the target (maximum of 10 points each). If you score a critical hit, the subject takes ability drain instead, but the effect is not doubled.  The target creature must succeed on a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of cold damage and become fatigued. A creature with immunity to cold is not affected by this spell.  You clutch at the air as though grabbing a nearby creature, and then you blow on yourﬁst.Asyoudoso,iceandsnowappear around your foe.  Necromancy Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Ablackshroudofmagicalenergysurrounds yourhands.Beneaththeshroudyourhands look withered and aged, like uncared-for ancient leather on the verge of crumbling to dust.  You makes a sound like whistling wind and inscribe a snowﬂake shape in the air, willing a chill to overcome your foe.  Evocation [Cold] Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  WITHERING PALM  CHAPTER 1  WINTER CHILL  WITHER LIMB  normal by a successful dispel magic from a spellcaster of a level higher than the level of the wither limb caster.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell increases the touched creature’s swim speed by 30 feet. It has no effect on other modes of movement, nor does it give the subject a swim speed if it does not already have one. Material Component: A drop of water.  that round. The second time a subject takes damage from a single casting of winter’s embrace, it becomes fatigued. The fourth time it takes damage from the same spell, it becomes exhausted.  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One nonmagical wooden object or a volume of wood; or one plant creature Duration: Instantaneous or 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By crushing a live termite between your teeth and reciting the necessary words of power, you ﬁnish casting the spell. When you cast this spell, an insidious rot immediately taints any wooden object or plant creature you touch. Any unattended nonmagical wooden item smaller than 6 feet in diameter, or a 3-foot-radius volume of a larger wooden object (such as a wooden door), is instantly destroyed by wood rot.  241  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  In combat, you can use the spell to attempt to sunder any wooden or wooden-hafted weapon; the weapon or its wooden portion is destroyed on a successful melee touch attack. Attempting to sunder a weapon generally provokes attacks of opportunity, and wood rot has no effect on wooden or wooden-hafted weapons that strike you, even if you hold the charge. Against wooden shields or armor, you also make a melee touch attack. Such targets too large to be destroyed outright take a –1d6 penalty to their armor or shield bonus on a successful hit and are rendered unusable if the penalty exceeds the bonus. Any attack against a wooden object discharges the spell, and wooden magic items are immune to the effect of wood rot. Against plant creatures, wood rot deals 3d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +15) on a successful attack. Against plant creatures, the spell lasts for 1 round per level, and you can make one melee touch attack per round. Once it is used to make an attack against a plant creature, wood rot cannot be used to attack or destroy wooden items. Material Component: A live termite.  WOOD WOSE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One nature servant Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Whistling up nature’s power and waving a branch of holly, you create a helper for the task at hand.  242  A wood wose is a translucent green nature spirit that you can command to perform simple natural tasks. It can build a campﬁre, gather herbs, feed an animal companion, catch a ﬁsh, or perform any other simple task that doesn’t involve knowledge of technology. It cannot, for example, open a latched chest, since it doesn’t know how a latch works. A wood wose can perform only one activity at a time, but it repeats the same activity if told to do so. Thus, if you commanded it to gather leaves, it would continue to do so while you  turned your attention elsewhere, as long as you remained within range. A wood wose has an effective Strength of 2, so it can lift 20 pounds or drag 100 pounds. It can trigger traps, but the 20 pounds of force it can exert is not enough to activate most pressure plates. It has a land speed of 15 feet and a ﬂy speed of 15 feet (perfect). A wood wose cannot attack in any way; it is never allowed an attack roll or a saving throw. It cannot be killed, but it dissipates if it takes 6 points of damage from area attacks. If you attempt to send the wose beyond the spell’s range (measured from your current position), it ceases to exist.  WORD OF BALANCE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Balance 7, druid 7 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: Creatures in a 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None or Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youuttertheelderwordsofbalance.Those who stray too far from the path of evenhandedness pay the price for their sins as the words judge them. Any lawful good, chaotic good, lawful evil, or chaotic evil creature that hears a word of balance suffers ill effects according to its Hit Dice, as given below, with no saving throw. These effects are cumulative. HD Equal to caster level Up to caster level –1  Effect Nauseated Weakened, nauseated Up to caster level –5 Paralyzed, weakened, nauseated Up to caster level –10 Killed Nauseated: The creature is limited to a single move action for 1 round but can defend itself normally. Weakened: The creature’s Strength decreases by 2d6 points for 2d4 rounds. Paralyzed: The creature is paralyzed and helpless for 1d10 minutes. Killed: The creature dies if living or is destroyed if undead.  If you are on your home plane when you cast this spell, every lawful good, chaotic good, lawful evil, and chaotic evil elemental and outsider within the area is instantly banished back to its home plane unless it makes a successful Will saving throw at a –4 penalty. Creatures so banished cannot return for at least 24 hours. The banishment effect occurs whether or not the creatures actually hear the word of balance, though those that do also suffer the appropriate effects (see above). Creatures whose HD exceed your caster level are unaffected by word of balance.  WORD OF BINDING  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller humanoid or monstrous humanoid Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes When you cast this spell and call to the target, shining steel manacles appear around its wrists and ankles. You create masterwork steel manacles that attempt to bind your target. A successful Reﬂex save allows the target to dodge the forming manacles; otherwise it is bound at its wrists and ankles. The imprisoned creature can slip free with a DC 35 Escape Artist check or a DC 28 Strength check. The manacles have hardness 10 and hit points equal to 10 + 1 per caster level. The manacles automatically scale to ﬁt any Medium or smaller humanoid creature. While imprisoned by the manacles, the subject cannot take any actions requiring the use of its hands and can move only 5 feet per round. The manacles come complete with an average quality lock (Open Lock DC 25).  WOUNDING WHISPERS Abjuration [Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Thewordsofthisspellproducehissing,sibilant echoes that spin around you, invoking doom upon those who dare to harm you.  Withtheﬁnalwordofthespell,yourchosen foeiswrackedwithsuchpainthatitdoubles overandcollapses.Itsfaceandhandsblister anddripﬂuid,anditseyescloudwithblood, rendering it blind. Your touch causes your target to experience excruciating pain. For the duration of the spell, the subject falls prone and is blinded and helpless. Even when the spell ends, the subject is still shaken for 3d10 minutes.  WRACKING TOUCH  Necromancy Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes You cry out with malice and clench your ﬁst,completingthespell.Thespell’sterrible energy causes your ﬁst to shake involuntarily, sending spasms up your arm.  The wraithstrike spell gives a spellcaster the ability to bypass armor  You lay your hand upon a creature and deal 1d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10). In addition, if you have the sneak attack ability, you also deal sneak attack damage to the affected creature unless the creature is immune to extra damage from critical hits. The creature still takes the spell damage even if it does not take the sneak attack damage. Unlike a normal use of sneak attack, your target need not be ﬂanked or denied its Dexterity bonus to take sneak attack damage from this spell.  WRAITHSTRIKE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 3, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round By presenting your weapon with an overly dramatic ﬂourish and calling out with a sickly-sounding moan, you complete the spell. As you do so, your weapon becomes translucent almost to the point that you cannot see it, though it still weighs as heavily in your hand. While this spell is in effect, your melee attacks are resolved as melee touch attacks rather than normal melee attacks.  WRATHFUL CASTIGATION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One humanoid Duration: 1 round/level + 3d10 minutes; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  WRACK  CHAPTER 1  Any creature striking you with its body or a handheld weapon takes 1d6 points of sonic damage +1 point per caster level. If a creature has spell resistance, it applies to this damage. Weapons with reach, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in this way. You cannot use this spell to deal damage to another target (for instance, with an unarmed attack or by forcing the whispers against a target). Only if another creature touches you does the effect deal damage.  You brandish the whip, and your target begins to shake uncontrollably, then collapsesontheground,itsspasmseventually fading as it dies. This spell causes wracking pain and violent convulsions, ending in death. The target creature must make a Will save or writhe in pain, helpless, before it dies 1 round later at the start of your turn. A creature that makes the Will save must also succeed on a second Will save or be dazed and take a –4 penalty on saving throws for the duration of the spell. Focus: A whip.  243  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  XORN MOVEMENT  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You concentrate on the piece of the xorn’s hide. As you intone the spell it begins to glow yellow, and then the glow spreads over your entire form. You complete the spellandslipeffortlesslybetweenthegaps intheearthitself,leavingnothingdisturbed in your wake.  The subject of this spell can move through natural earth and stone (but not worked stone, brick, or metal) as a xorn does, leaving behind no tunnel or sign of passage. Furthermore, the subject can breathe normally while entombed in earth and natural rock. A move earth spell cast on an area the subject occupies ﬂings it back 30 feet and stuns it for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save negates the stunning effect. Xorn movement lasts a minimum of 1 round/level. If the subject has not emerged into a large enough open space to contain its body comfortably when the spell expires, it is shunted off to the nearest such open space, taking 1d6 points of damage per 5 feet so traveled. Focus: A scale from a xorn’s hide.  ZEAL  Abjuration Level: Competition 2, blackguard 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youinvokeadivineshieldtoprotectyouas you close with a chosen opponent.  244  Choose a foe as you cast this spell. You gain a +4 deﬂection bonus to AC against all attacks of opportunity from opponents other than the chosen foe. Also, you can move through enemies as if they were allies for the duration  of this spell, as long as you ﬁnish your movement closer to your chosen foe than when you began it.  ZEALOT PACT  Evocation Level: Cleric 6, Competition 6, Pact 6 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched Duration: Permanent until triggered; then 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Bybindingthesubjecttoyourdeity,yougive it the ability to crush the deity’s enemies. Once this spell is cast, the zealot pact remains dormant until the subject successfully hits a foe whose alignment is exactly opposite that of your deity. The subject’s subsequent melee attacks gain a +4 bonus and deal double damage. Once the spell is active, the subject must attack foes of opposite alignment every round if able to do so, or the spell effect ends. The subject knows which creatures within 60 feet are of opposite alignment. If you create a zealot pact with a neutral deity (such as Obad-Hai), choose one alignment from among the following that triggers the zealot pact: lawful good, lawful evil, chaotic evil, or -chaotic good. A creature can be subject to only one zealot pact at a time. Casting zealot pact on a subject that already has an untriggered zealot pact voids the earlier pact. XP Cost: 500 XP.  ZONE OF RESPITE  Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 2 rounds Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Smearingbloodbetweenyourﬁngers,you inscribeawardintheairandcastthepower of that ward over a wide area.  You create a region that is temporarily protected against interplanar intrusion. This includes spells and abilities that use other planes, including dimension door, teleport, plane shift, and travel through such planes as the Astral Plane, the Ethereal Plane, and the Plane of Shadow. Summoning and calling spells do not function within a zone of respite, but summoned and called creatures outside a zone of respite can be sent inside it. Gate spells and other portals cannot be created within a zone of respite, but existing portals are unaffected by the spell. Creatures on coterminous or coexistent planes (DMG 150) must retreat to the edge of the zone of respite and cannot enter the corresponding area on the coterminous or coexistent plane. Material Component: A small amount of blood from a gorgon.  ZONE OF REVELATION  Divination Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 5-ft.-radius/level emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes After making a dramatic gesture and uttering a few words of power, you close your eyes and open them again, revealing all that is hidden. All creatures and objects within a zone of revelation are made visible. This includes invisible creatures, as well as those on coexistent planes such as the Ethereal Plane and the Plane of Shadow (DMG 150). Natives of these planes do not lose any abilities but are simply made visible. Zone of revelation suppresses but does not dispel invisibility, etherealness, or other spells. Once a formerly invisible object or creature leaves the area, it becomes invisible again. Ethereal creatures in the spell’s area become nonethereal until they move beyond the spell’s range. Arcane Material Component: A handful of dust from the grave clothes of an undead creature.  CHAPTER 2: SPELL LISTS  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Illus. by D. Martin  These lists summarize the spells described here. An M or F appearing at the end of a spell’s name in the spell lists denotes a spell with a costly material component or a focus component, respectively, that is not normally included in a spell component pouch. An X denotes a spell with an XP component paid by the caster.  ASSASSIN SPELLS 1ST-LEVEL ASSASSIN SPELLS  Critical Strike: For 1 round you gain +1d6 damage, doubled threat range, and +4 on attack rolls to conﬁrm critical threats. Dead End: Removes spoor of one creature/level. Distract Assailant: One creature is ﬂat-footed for 1 round. Ebon Eyes: Subject can see through magical darkness. Insightful Feint: Gain +10 on your next Bluff check to feint in combat. Instant Locksmith: Make Disable Device or Open Lock check at +2 as free action. Instant Search: Make Search check at +2 as free action. Lightfoot: Your move does not provoke attacks of opportunity for 1 round. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Shock and Awe: Flat-footed creatures get –10 on initiative.  Silent Portal: Negates sound from door or window. Sniper’s Shot: No range limit on next ranged sneak attack. Sticky Fingers: You get +10 on Sleight of Hand checks.  2ND-LEVEL ASSASSIN SPELLS  Absorb Weapon: Hide a weapon, gain a Bluff check with a +4 bonus on feint attempts when you draw it. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Fire Shuriken: Magical shuriken deal 3d6 ﬁre damage. Ice Knife: Magical shard of ice deals 2d8 cold damage plus 2 Dex damage, or deals 1d8 cold damage in 10-ft.-radius burst. Invisibility, Swift: You are invisible for 1 round or until you attack. Iron Silence: Armor touched has no armor check penalty on Hide and Move Silently for 1 hour/level. Marked Object: You gain bonus to track a speciﬁc being. Phantom FoeM: Subject is always ﬂanked by one creature. Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment.  245  Beastland Ferocity: Subject ﬁghts without penalty while disabled or dying. Amorphous Form: Subject becomes puddlelike and can Cheat: Caster rerolls when determining the success of a slip through cracks quickly. game of chance. Fangs of the Vampire King: Grow vampire fangs. Crabwalk: Touched creature gains bonus while charging. Find the Gap: Your attacks ignore armor and natural Critical Strike: For 1 round you gain +1d6 damage, armor. doubled threat range, and +4 on attack Spectral Weapon: Use quasi-real weapon to make touch rolls to conﬁrm critical threats. attacks. Dead End: Removes spoor of one Spider Poison: Touch deals 1d6 Str damage, repeats creature/level. in 1 minute. Distort Speech: Subject’s Wraithstrike: Your melee speech is 50% unintelligible, attacks strike as touch so it might miscast spells. attacks for 1 round. Distract: Subjects take –4 on Concentration, Listen, 4TH-LEVEL Search, and Spot. Expeditious Retreat, Swift: ASSASSIN SPELLS Your speed increases by Cursed Blade: Wounds 30 ft. for 1 round. dealt by weapon can’t be Focusing Chant: Gain +1 on healed without remove attack rolls, skill checks, curse. and ability checks. Heart Ripper: Kills living Guiding Light: +2 on ranged creature with up to your attacks against creatures caster level in HD. in illuminated area. Hide from Dragons: Dragons Healthful Rest: Subjects can’t perceive one subject/2 heal at twice the normal levels. rate. Implacable Pursuer: You Herald’s Call: Creatures know where prey is, as long of 5 HD or less within as it’s moving. 20 ft. slowed for 1 round. Shadow Form: Gain +4 on Improvisation: You gain Hide, Move Silently, and a pool of luck bonus Escape Artist checks, and points equal to twice your concealment; you can caster level and can spend move through obstacles them to improve attack if you have ranks in rolls, skill checks, and Escape Artist. ability checks. Shadow Phase: Subject Incite: Subjects can’t ready An assassin casts absorb weapon in order to becomes partially retain a secret advantage actions or delay. incorporeal. Inhibit: Subject delays until next round. Sniper’s Eye: Gain +10 Spot, darkvision, 60-ft. range for Insidious Rhythm: Subject has –4 penalty on sneak attacks, and death attacks with ranged weapons. Intelligence-based skill checks and Concentration Vulnerability: Reduces an opponent’s damage reduction. checks, and must make Concentration check to cast spells. Inspirational Boost: The bonuses granted by your inspire courage ability increase by 1. Invisibility, Swift: You are invisible for 1 round or until 0-LEVEL BARD SPELLS (CANTRIPS) you attack. Ghostharp: Object records, plays a song at your command. Ironguts: Subject gains +5 bonus on saving throws against Minor Disguise: Makes slight changes to your poison. Ironthunder Horn: Intense vibrations trip those in area. appearance. Songbird: Perform and gain +1 on your next Cha check. Joyful Noise: You negate silence in a 10-ft.-radius Stick: Glues an object weighing 5 pounds or less to another emanation for as long as you concentrate. object. Master’s Touch: You gain proﬁciency in a weapon or shield touched for 1 minute/level. Phantom Threat: Subject thinks it’s ﬂanked. 1ST-LEVEL BARD SPELLS Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Accelerated Movement: Balance, Climb, or Move Silently Serene Visage: Gain insight bonus on Bluff checks equal at normal speed with no penalty on skill check. to half your level. Amplify: Lowers Listen DC by 20. Shock and Awe: Flat-footed creatures get –10 on initiative. Appraising Touch: Gain +10 bonus on Appraise checks.  Illus. b M. Cotie  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  3RD-LEVEL ASSASSIN SPELLS  BARD SPELLS  246  Sticky Fingers: You get +10 on Sleight of Hand checks. Targeting Ray: You and allies are +1 to hit/3 levels against subject. Undersong: Make Perform checks instead of Concentration checks.  2ND-LEVEL BARD SPELLS  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Alarm, Greater F: As alarm, and it works on coexistent planes. Battle Hymn: Allies can reroll one Will save/round. Bladeweave: Your melee attack dazes your opponent. BoneﬁddleF: Spectral ﬁddle bow deals 3d6 damage/round. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Cloak Pool: Hide a color pool on the Astral Plane from view. Cloud of Bewilderment: Generates a nauseating 10-ftcube. Curse of Impending Blades: Subject takes –2 penalty to AC. Dark Way: Creates temporary unbreakable bridge supporting up to 200 lb./level. Delusions of Grandeur: Subject thinks it is better than it is. Discolor Pool: Change the color of a color pool on the Astral Plane. Disquietude: Subject avoids physical contact with others. Dissonant Chant: Concentration checks more difﬁcult within area of spell. Distracting Ray: Ray forces spellcaster to make Concentration check. Entice Gift: Subject gives caster what it’s holding. Fly, Swift: Gain ﬂy speed of 60 ft. for 1 round. Grace: Silvery light grants +2 Dexterity, +10 feet to land speed, melee attacks treated as good; take –20 to Hide checks. Harmonic Chorus: Give another caster +2 to caster level and +2 on save DCs as long as you concentrate. Heartﬁre: Subjects outlined by ﬁre, take 1d4 damage/ round. Iron Silence: Armor touched has no armor check penalty on Hide and Move Silently for 1 hour/level. Know Vulnerabilities: Determine subject’s vulnerabilities and resistances. Lively Step: You and allies gain +10 increase to speed. Mesmerizing Glare: Your gaze fascinates creatures. Mindless Rage: Subject compelled to attack you physically for 1 round/level. Miser’s Envy: Subject jealously covets a nearby object. Nightmare Lullaby: Subject is confused. Portal Alarm: You are alerted when a creature passes through a warded portal. Reﬂective Disguise: Viewers see you as their own species and gender. Reveille: Dead creature speaks a short sentence about what caused its death. Sonic Weapon: Weapon touched deals +1d6 sonic damage with each hit. Sonic Whip: Whip of magical force keeps animals at bay and can frighten animals as ranged touch attack. Sonorous Hum: Removes need to concentrate to maintain next spell cast.  Speak to Allies: Subjects can converse at distance without moving lips. Sting Ray: Subject of ray can take only standard or move action, has –2 AC, and must make Concentration checks to cast spells. Summon Elysian Thrush: Summon an Elysian thrush, which accelerates natural healing. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Tactical Precision: Allies gain additional +2 bonus on attack rolls and +1d6 additional damage against ﬂanked foes. War Cry: Gain +4 on attack rolls and damage rolls if you charge. Any opponent you damage must save or become panicked for 1 round. Wave of Grief: Cone imposes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves. Weapon Shift: Touched weapon changes form. Whirling Blade: Hurled slashing weapon magically attacks all foes in 60-ft. line.  3RD-LEVEL BARD SPELLS  Allegro: You and your allies gain +30 ft. speed for 1 minute/level. Analyze Portal: Find a nearby portal and discover its properties. Creaking Cacophony: Sound distracts and makes foes vulnerable to sonic damage. Curse of Impending Blades, Mass: Enemies take –2 penalty to AC. Dirge of Discord: All within 20 ft. take –4 on attack rolls and Dexterity, and reduce speed by 50%. Dissonant Chord: Deal 1d8/2 levels sonic damage in 10-ft. burst. Dolorous Blow: Weapon’s threat range is doubled and threats are automatically conﬁrmed. G’elsewhere Chant: Teleport subject to random safe place within 100 ft. Haunting Tune: 1 subject/level becomes shaken. Hymn of Praise: Add +2 to caster level to all good divine casters within range. Infernal Threnody: Add +2 to caster level to all evil divine casters within range. Know Opponent: Learn strengths and weaknesses of foe. Listening Coin: You can eavesdrop through a magic coin. Love’s Lament: Cone deals 1d6 Wisdom damage and causes nausea. Puppeteer: Subject mimics your actions. Ray of Dizziness: Subject can take only move or standard actions. Shadow Cache: You open a small portal to the Plane of Shadow through which you can put an item for later retrieval. Speechlink: You and one other creature can talk, no matter how far apart. Suppress Breath Weapon: Subject can’t use breath weapon. Treasure Scent: You detect valuable metals and gems. Unluck: Subject remakes all rolls, uses worse result for 1 round/level.  247  Weapon of Impact: As keen edge, but aids bludgeoning weapons. Wounding Whispers: Sonic aura damages foes that strike you.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  4TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS  248  Reﬂective Disguise, Mass: Viewers see subjects as their own species and gender. Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple subjects. Wail of Doom: Deal 1d4 damage/level in 30-ft. cone, plus subjects panicked or shaken.  Cacophonic Shield: Shield 10 ft. from you blocks sounds, deals 1d6 sonic damage +1/level, and deafens creatures 6TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS Dirge: Enemies take 2 points of Str and passing through. Celebration: Intoxicate subjects. Dex damage/round. Ethereal Mount: You conjure HindsightM: You see into the past. Nixie’s Grace: You swift mounts on the gain a swim speed, Ethereal Plane. FugueF: Your Perform water breathing, lowcheck creates variety of light vision, damage effects. reduction 5/cold iron, Lay of the Land: You and enhancements to gain an overview of the Dexterity and Wisdom. Ray of Light: Ray blinds geography around you. Ray Deﬂection: Ray subject. Revenance: Restores dead attacks are reﬂected creature to life for 1 away. Portal Alarm, Improved: minute/level. Resistance, Superior: Warded portal alerts you or a creature designated Subject gains +6 on by you to creatures saving throws. Symphonic NightmareM: passing through it. Protégé: Subject can use Discordant noise bardic music and bardic haunts subject’s sleep. knowledge as bard of half your level. Travel through the Ethereal Plane is faster Resistance, Greater: Subject on the back of an ethereal mount gains +3 on saving throws. Resonating Bolt: Sonic energy deals 1d4 damage/level (max 10d4). Ruin Delver’s Fortune: Cast on another creature’s turn 1ST-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELLS and choose one of several beneﬁts. Blessed Aim: +2 bonus for allies’ ranged attacks. Sirine’s Grace: You gain bonuses to Charisma and Divine Sacriﬁce: You sacriﬁce hit points to deal extra Dexterity, AC, and Perform checks, and can breathe damage. water. Golden Barding: Your mount gets force armor. Spectral Weapon: Use quasi-real weapon to make touch Faith Healing: Cures 8 hp +1/level (max +5) to worshiper attacks. of your deity. Stone Shatter: Shatter a stone object or creature. Know Greatest Enemy: Determines relative power level Voice of the Dragon: +10 on Bluff, Diplomacy, and of creatures within the area. Intimidate checks; can use one suggestion. Mark of the Outcast: Subject takes –5 penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and –2 penalty to AC. 5TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS Resurgence: You grant subject a second chance at a saving Blink, Greater: Controlled blinking between the Material throw. Strategic Charge: Gain the beneﬁts of the Mobility feat. and Ethereal Planes grants defenses for 1 round/level. Body HarmonicF: Piercing tone deals 1d10 damage to one Summon Undead I: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. ability/round. Bolts of Bedevilment: One ray/round, dazes 1d3 rounds. Cacophonic Burst: Noise deals 1d6/level sonic damage to 2ND-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELLS all within area. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Dragonsight: Gain low-light vision, darkvision, and Curse of Ill Fortune: Subject takes –3 penalty on attacks, blindsense. checks, and saves. Hidden Lodge: Creates sturdy cottage camouﬂaged to Demonhide: Evil creature gains DR 10/cold iron or good. blend into natural surroundings. Hand of Divinity: Gives +2 sacred or profane bonus on Hide from Dragons: Dragons can’t perceive one subject/ saves to worshiper of your deity. 2 levels. Summon Undead II: Summons undead to ﬁght for you.  BLACKGUARD SPELLS  Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment. Wave of Grief: Cone imposes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves. Zeal: You move through foes to attack the enemy you want.  3RD-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELL  Implacable Pursuer: You know where prey is, as long as it’s moving. Revenance: Restores dead creature to life for 1 minute/ level. Summon Undead IV: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Visage of the Deity, Lesser: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. Winged Mount: Your mount grows wings and ﬂies at speed of 60 ft.  CLERIC SPELLS 0-LEVEL CLERIC SPELL (ORISON) Amanuensis: Copy nonmagical text.  1ST-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Anarchic Water M: Makes chaotic-aligned anarchic water. Axiomatic Water M: Makes lawful-aligned axiomatic water. Blessed Aim: +2 bonus for allies’ ranged attacks. Blood Wind: Subject uses natural weapon at range. Cold Fire: Fire becomes blue and white, emits cold. Conviction: Subject gains +2 or higher save bonus. Delay Disease: Ravages of disease staved off for a day. Dispel Ward: As dispel magic, but affects only wards. Ebon Eyes: Subject can see through magical darkness. Faith Healing: Cures 8 hp +1/level (max +5) to worshiper of your deity. Foundation of Stone: +2 AC, +4 bonus to resist bull rush and trip attacks. Grave Strike: You can sneak attack undead for 1 round. Guiding Light: +2 on ranged attacks against creatures in illuminated area. Healthful Rest: Subjects heal at twice the normal rate. Ice Gauntlet: A spiked gauntlet of ice forms around your ﬁst. Incite: Subjects can’t ready actions or delay. Inhibit: Subject delays until next round. Ironguts: Subject gains +5 bonus on saving throws against poison.  SPELL LISTS  4TH-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELLS  CHAPTER 2  Fangs of the Vampire King: Grow vampire fangs. Mantle of Evil: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with the good descriptor. Resurgence, Mass: As resurgence, but multiple subjects. Spiritual Chariot: Creates ghostly chariot behind your mount. Summon Undead III: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Unholy Storm M: Evil-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Weapon of the Deity: Your weapon gains enhancement bonus and special ability.  Light of Lunia: You radiate silvery light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage. Moon Lust: Subject obsesses about moon, is fascinated or dazzled. Nightshield: You gain resistance bonus on saves, and spell absorbs magic missile damage. Nimbus of Light: Light illuminates you until released as an attack. Omen of PerilF: You know how dangerous the future will be. Portal Beacon: You grant others knowledge of a magic portal’s location. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Resurgence: You grant subject a second chance at a saving throw. Sign: You gain +4 bonus on next initiative check. Snowshoes: Subject walks easily on ice and snow. Spell Flower: Hold the charge on one touch spell per forelimb. Summon Undead I: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Updraft: Column of wind lifts you aloft. Vigor, Lesser: Creature heals 1 hp/round (max 15 rounds). Vision of Glory: Subject gains morale bonus equal to your Cha modiﬁer to one saving throw. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed.  2ND-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Aura Against Flame: Ignores 10 ﬁre damage/round and extinguishes ﬁres. Avoid Planar Effects: Provides temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Balor Nimbus: Your ﬂaming body damages foes in grapple. Body Blades: You gain spikes, harm grapplers. Brambles: Wooden weapon grows spikes that deal +1 damage/level (max +10). Close Wounds: Cure 1d4 damage +1/level, even on another’s turn. Curse of Ill Fortune: Subject takes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves. Dark Way: Creates temporary unbreakable bridge supporting up to 200 lb./level. Deiﬁc Vengeance: Deity’s punishment deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). Divine Insight: You gain insight bonus of 5 + caster level on one single skill check. Divine Interdiction: Turn/rebuke attempts fail within the area. Divine Protection: Allies gain +1 to AC, saves. Energized Shield, Lesser: Shield provides user resistance 5, shield bash deals +1d6 damage. Extend Tentacles: +5 ft. to reach of tentacle attack. Frost Breath: Icy breath deals 1d4 damage/2 levels. Fuse Arms: Multiple arms/tentacles become one pair of stronger limbs. Ghost Touch Armor: Armor works normally against incorporeal attacks. Hand of Divinity: Gives +2 sacred or profane bonus to worshiper of your deity.  249  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Healing Lorecall: If you have 5 or more ranks in Heal, you can remove harmful conditions with conjuration (healing) spells. Infernal Wound: Weapon deals persistent, bleeding wounds. Inky Cloud: Obscures sight underwater beyond 5 ft. Iron Silence: Armor touched has no armor check penalty on Hide and Move Silently checks for 1 hour/level. Light of Mercuria: You radiate golden light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage, 2d6 against undead and evil outsiders. Living Undeath: Subject becomes immune to extra damage from critical hits and sneak attacks. Mark of the Outcast: Subject takes –5 penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and –2 penalty to AC. Protection from Negative Energy: Ignore 10 points of negative energy damage per attack. Protection from Positive Energy: Ignore 10 points of positive energy damage per attack. Quick March: Allies’ speed increases by 30 ft. for 1 round. Shroud of Undeath: Negative energy shroud makes undead perceive you as undead. Spawn Screen: Subject resists being transformed into an undead spawn if slain. Spell Immunity, Lesser: As spell immunity, but only 1stand 2nd-level spells. Stabilize: Cures 1 point of damage to all creatures in area. Stone Bones: Corporeal undead gains +3 natural armor bonus. Summon Elysian Thrush: Summon an Elysian thrush, which accelerates natural healing. Summon Undead II: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment. Wave of Grief: Cone imposes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves.  3RD-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  250  Aid, Mass: Allies gain +1 on attack rolls, +1 against fear, 1d8 temporary hp +1/level (max +15). Air Breathing: Subjects can breathe air freely. Align Weapon, Mass: Allies’ weapons become good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Anarchic Storm M: Chaotic-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Antidragon AuraM: Allies gain bonus to AC and saves against dragons. Attune Form: Grant creature temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Awaken Sin: Subject faces its sins, takes 1d6 nonlethal damage/level (10d6 max). Axiomatic Storm M: Lawful-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Blindsight: Subject gains blindsight 30 ft. for 1 minute/ level. Chain of Eyes: See through other creatures’ eyes. Checkmate’s Light: Your weapon becomes a +1 axiomatic weapon and bolsters the morale of allies. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Cloak of Bravery: You and your allies gain a bonus on saves against fear.  Clutch of Orcus: Deals 1d12 damage/round and paralyzes foe. Conviction, Mass: Allies gain +2 or higher save bonus. Corona of Cold: Aura of cold protects you, damages others. Darkﬁre: Dark ﬂames deal 1d6 damage/2 levels, touch or thrown. Demon Dirge: Demons are stunned and take 3d6 damage/ round for 1d4 rounds. Devil Blight: Damage and stun baatezu; damage other lawful and evil creatures. Downdraft: Flying creatures knocked down. Energized Shield: Shield provides user resistance 10, shield bash deals +2d6 damage. Energy Vortex: Burst of energy centered on you damages nearby creatures. Favorable SacriﬁceM: Subject gains better protection the more gems you sacriﬁce. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Flame of Faith: Gives weapon the ﬂaming burst special ability. Ghost Touch Weapon: Weapon works normally against incorporeal creatures. Girallon’s Blessing: Subject gains one additional pair of arms. Grace: Silvery light grants +2 Dexterity, +10 feet to land speed, melee attacks treated as good; take –20 to Hide checks. Hamatula Barbs: Subjects grow barbs, which damage foes that attack subject in melee. Holy Storm M: Good-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Ice Axe: You create a battleaxe made of ice. Interplanar Message: You send a short mental message that can reach a subject regardless of planar boundaries. Knight’s Move: You instantly move to ﬂank a subject. Know Opponent: Learn strengths and weaknesses of foe. Know Vulnerabilities: Determine subject’s vulnerabilities and resistances. Light of Venya: You radiate pearly light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 2d6 damage, 4d6 against undead and evil outsiders. Mantle of Chaos/Evil/Good/Law: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with opposite alignment descriptor. Nauseating Breath: Exhale a cone of nauseating gas. Rejuvenative Corpse: Negative energy ﬁlls corpse, feeding undead healed. Resist Energy, Mass: Creatures ignore damage from speciﬁed energy type. Resurgence, Mass: As resurgence, but multiple subjects. Ring of Blades: Blades surround you, damaging other creatures (1d6 damage +1/level). Safety: Touched creature knows shortest route to safety. Shield of Warding: Shield grants +1 bonus on AC and Reﬂex saves/5 levels (max +5). Sink: Subject sinks in water, must make Swim checks. Skull Watch: Skull shrieks when creature enters warded area. Slashing Darkness: Ray deals 1d8/2 levels damage or heals undead the same amount.  Illus. by C. Frank  Assay Spell Resistance: +10 bonus on caster level checks to defeat one creature’s spell resistance. Astral HospiceM: While on the Astral Plane, open a portal to a demiplane so natural healing can occur. Blindsight, Greater: Subject gains blindsight 60 ft. for 1 minute/level. Castigate: Verbal rebuke damages those whose alignment differs from yours. Consumptive Field: Draw life from all creatures in 30-ft. radius with –1 or fewer hit points. Contingent Energy Resistance: Energy damage triggers a resist energy spell. Delay Death: Losing hit points doesn’t kill subject. Glowing OrbF: Creates permanent magical light; you control brightness. Hand of the Faithful: Immobile zone of warding stuns those worshiping different deities from yours. Holy Transformation, Lesser: You change into protectar, gain abilities. Hypothermia: Causes 1d6 cold damage/level, fatigue. Infernal Transformation, Lesser: You change into bearded devil, gain abilities. Iron Bones: Corporeal undead gains +6 natural armor bonus. Life Ward: Grants immunity to healing spells and positive energy effects. Make Manifest: You cause a creature on a coexistent plane to appear on your plane. Moon Bolt: 1d4 Strength damage/3 levels; undead made helpless. Negative Energy Aura: 10-ft. radius surrounding you deals 1 hp/3 levels for 1 round/level. Panacea: Removes most afﬂictions.  SPELL LISTS  4TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Planar Exchange, Lesser: Trade places with one of four lesser planar creatures (your choice). Planar Tolerance: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Positive Energy Aura: 10-ft. radius surrounding you heals 1 hp/3 levels for 1 round/level. Recitation: Your allies get bonus on AC, attacks and saves. Resistance, Greater: Subject gains +3 on saving throws. Revenance: Restores dead creature to life for 1 minute/ level. Shadowblast: Blast of light stuns and damages natives to the Plane of Shadow. Sheltered Vitality: Subject gains immunity to fatigue, exhaustion, ability damage, and ability drain. Shield of Faith, Mass: Allies gain +3 or higher AC bonus. Sound Lance: Sonic energy deals 1d8/level damage. Spell Vulnerability: Reduce creature’s spell resistance by 1/caster level (max reduction 15). Summon Hound Archon: Summon a hound archon to follow your commands. Summon Undead IV: Summons undead to ﬁght for you.  CHAPTER 2  Snowshoes, Mass: As snowshoes, affects one creature/ level. Sonorous Hum: Removes need to concentrate to maintain next spell cast. Spark of Life: Undead creature loses most immunities. Spikes: As brambles, but weapon gains +2 bonus and doubled threat range. Summon Undead III: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Suppress Glyph: You notice but do not trigger magical writing traps. Tremor: Subjects knocked prone. Unholy Storm M: Evil-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Vigor: As lesser vigor, but 2 hp/round (max 25 rounds). Vigor, Mass Lesser: As lesser vigor, but multiple subjects (max 25 rounds). Visage of the Deity, Lesser: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. Wall of Light: Creates wall of light, can dazzle creatures. Weapon of Energy: Weapon deals extra energy damage. Weapon of Impact: As keen edge, but aids bludgeoning weapons. Weapon of the Deity: Your weapon gains enhancement bonus and special ability.  Devil blight is the perfect spell for dealing with baatezu  251  Undead Bane Weapon: Weapon gains undead bane property and is considered good-aligned. Wall of Chaos/Evil/Good/Law: Wall blocks creatures of opposite alignment. Wall of Sand: Swirling sand blocks ranged attacks, slows movement through. Wrack: Renders creature helpless with pain.  Illus. by M. Cotie  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  5TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  252  Symbol of Spell Loss: Triggered rune absorbs spells yet to be cast. Triadspell: Cast a prepared spell three times. Vigor, Greater: As lesser vigor, but 4 hp/round. Vulnerability: Reduces an opponent’s damage reduction. Wall of Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall become subjects of targeted dispel magic. Zone of Respite: Prevents teleportation and similar effects from functioning in the area. Zone of Revelation: Makes invisible and ethereal creatures visible.  Aura of Evasion M: All within 10 ft. gain evasion against breath weapons. Blistering Radiance: Light dazzles creatures, deals 2d6 6TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS ﬁre damage in 50-ft.-radius spread. Call ZelekhutX: A zelekhut performs one Barghest’s FeastM: Destroy corpse, duty for you. potentially preventing its return to life. Contagion, Mass: As contagion, but Bolt of Glory: Positive energy 20-ft. radius. ray deals extra damage to evil Crawling Darkness: Shroud of outsiders and undead. tentacles conceals and protects Cold Snap: You lower you. temperature in area. Curse of Ill Fortune, Mass: Cometfall: Comet falls atop foes, damaging them and Enemies take –2 penalty knocking them prone. on attack rolls and saves. Death Throes: Your body Energy Immunity: Subject and equipment explodes when you die. Divine Agility: Subject gain immunity to gains +10 to Dexterity for damage of speciﬁed 1 round/level. energy type. Doomtide: Black mist Ghost Trap: Incorporeal obscures sight, dazes creatures turn those inside. corporeal. Dragon Breath: You Hide the Path F: Area choose a dragon type and warded against mimic its breath weapon. divinations. Earth Reaver: Eruption Ice Flowers: Ice and earth deals 7d6 damage to all deal 1d6 damage/level. Lucent Lance: Ambient in area. Incorporeal Nova: light forms lance, deals various damage. Destroy incorporeal Make Manifest, Mass: undead. Life’s Grace: Grants As make manifest but immunity to many affecting all creatures Clerics prepare for the day by praying for spells undead attacks and in the area. Mantle of the Icy SoulM: Touched creature gains the cold protection against incorporeal attacks. RevivifyM: Restore recently dead to life with no level loss. subtype. Righteous Wrath of the Faithful: Your allies gain extra Opalescent Glare: Kill creatures with a look, or make attack, +3 on attack rolls and damage rolls. them very afraid. Sanctuary, Mass: One creature/level can’t be attacked, Planar Exchange: Trade places with one of three planar and can’t attack. creatures (your choice). Stalwart PactM: You gain combat bonuses automatically Rejection: Creatures within cone are blasted away from when reduced to half hit points or lower. you. Stone Shape, Greater: Sculpts 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./level of Revive Outsider M: You restore life to a dead outsider. stone into any shape. Sarcophagus of Stone: Sarcophagus entombs subject. Subvert Planar Essence: Reduces subject’s damage Spider Plague: Summons Large monstrous spiders to ﬁght for you. reduction and spell resistance. Summon Bearded Devil: Summon a bearded devil to Stone Body: Your body becomes living stone. Summon Babau Demon: Summon a babau demon to follow your commands. Summon Bralani Eladrin: Summon a bralani eladrin to follow your commands. Resistance, Superior: Subject gains +6 on saving throws. follow your commands. Summon Undead V: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Vigorous Circle: As mass lesser vigor except 3 hp/round (max 40 rounds).  Visage of the Deity: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become celestial or ﬁendish. Zealot PactX: You automatically gain combat bonuses when you attack someone of opposite alignment.  7TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Bodak’s GlareF: You slay a creature, which turns into a bodak 24 hours later. Brilliant Aura: Allies’ weapons become brilliant energy, ignoring armor. Death PactM: Deity brings subject back from the dead automatically. Death Ward, Mass: As death ward, but more subjects. Fierce Pride of the Beastlands: Summon celestial lions and celestial dire lions to follow your commands. General of Undeath: Increases your maximum HD of controlled undead by your level. Heat Drain: Subjects take 1d6 cold damage/level, you gain equal amount hp.  Abyssal Army: Summons demons to ﬁght for you. Awaken ConstructX: Construct gains humanlike sentience. Call MarutX: A marut performs one duty for you. Heavenly Host: Summons archons to ﬁght for you. Hellish Horde: Summons devils to ﬁght for you. Hunters of HadesM: Summons a pair of pack ﬁends or a retriever to follow your commands. Plague of Undead M: Animates horde of undead. Summon Elemental Monolith M: Calls powerful elemental creature to ﬁght for you. Undeath’s Eternal Foe: Subjects receive negative energy protection and immunity to most undead special attacks. Vile Death MX: Undead creature gains ﬁendish template. Visage of the Deity, Greater: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish.  SPELL LISTS  8TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  9TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  CHAPTER 2  Bestow Curse, Greater: As bestow curse, but more severe penalties. Blood to Water: 2d6 Constitution damage to subjects. Brain Spider: Eavesdrop on thoughts of up to eight other creatures. Brilliant Blade: Weapon or projectiles shed light, ignore armor. Call KolyarutX: A kolyarut performs one duty for you. Consumptive Field, Greater: Draw life from all creatures in 30-ft. radius with 9 or fewer hit points. Death Dragon: You gain +4 natural armor, +4 deﬂection, and natural attacks. Energy Ebb: Give subject one negative level/round for 1 round/level. Evil Glare: Paralyze creatures with your glare. Fortunate Fate: Subject immediately receives a heal if it would be killed by damage. Holy Star: Mote of energy protects you, attacks foes. Holy Transformation: You change into hound archon, gain abilities. Infernal Transformation: You change into bone devil, gain abilities. Planar Bubble: Create bubble around creature that emulates its native planar environment. Plane Shift, Greater: Plane shift accurately to your desired destination. Radiant Assault: 1d6 damage/level, victims dazed or dazzled. Renewal PactM: Creature is automatically healed if adverse condition affects it. Restoration, MassM: As restoration, but multiple subjects. Slime Wave: Creates a 15-ft. spread of green slime. Spell Resistance, Mass: As spell resistance, but multiple subjects. Symphonic NightmareM: Discordant noise haunts subject’s sleep. Withering Palm: Touch attack deals 1 point Str damage plus 1 point Con damage/2 levels.  Lion’s Roar: Deals 1d8 points of damage/2 levels to enemies; allies get +1 on attacks and saves against fear, plus temporary hp. Planar Exchange, Greater: Trade places with one of three greater planar creatures (your choice). Stormrage: You can ﬂy and ﬁre lightning from your eyes. Veil of Undeath: You gain undead traits. Wall of Greater Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall become subjects of targeted greater dispel magic.  DRUID SPELLS 0-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS (ORISONS)  Dawn: Sleeping/unconscious creatures in area awaken. Naturewatch: As deathwatch, but on animals and plants.  1ST-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Animate Fire: Turn campﬁre into Small elemental. Animate Water: Turn quantity of water into Small elemental. Animate Wood: Turn Small or smaller wooden item into animated object. Aspect of the Wolf: You change into a wolf and gain some of its abilities. Aura Against Flame: Ignores 10 ﬁre damage/round and extinguishes ﬁres. Babau Slime: Secrete a body-covering acid that damages attacking foes. Beast Claws: Your hands become slashing natural weapons. Beastland Ferocity: Subject ﬁghts without penalty while disabled or dying. Beget Bogun MX: You create a Tiny nature servant. Branch to Branch: You gain +10 competence bonus on Climb checks in trees and can brachiate through forest. Breath of the Jungle: Fog makes poison and diseases harder to resist. Buoyant Lifting: Underwater creatures rise to surface. Camouﬂage: Grants +10 bonus on Hide checks.  253  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Claws of the Bear: Your hands become weapons that deal 1d8 damage. Climb Walls: Touched creature gains increased climbing ability. Cloudburst: Hampers vision and ranged attacks, puts out normal ﬁres. Cold Fire: Fire becomes blue and white, emits cold. Crabwalk: Touched creature gains bonus while charging. Deep Breath: Your lungs are ﬁlled with air. Delay Disease: Ravages of disease staved off for a day. Enrage Animal: Animal rages like barbarian, not fatigued. Foundation of Stone: +2 AC, +4 bonus to resist bull rush and trip attacks. Hawkeye: Increase range increments by 50%, +5 on Spot checks. Healthful Rest: Subjects heal at twice the normal rate. Horrible Taste: Touched creature or object nauseates biting or swallowing foes. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Omen of PerilF: You know how dangerous the future will be. Raging Flame: Fires burn twice as hot, half as long. Ram’s Might: Gain +2 to Strength and your unarmed attacks deal normal damage. Rapid Burrowing: +20 ft. to subject’s burrow speed. Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Sandblast: You ﬁre hot sand that deals 1d6 nonlethal damage, stuns enemies. Slow Burn: Fires burn twice as long. Snake’s Swiftness: Subject immediately makes one attack. Snowshoes: Subject walks easily on ice and snow. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Thunderhead: Small lightning bolts deal 1d6 damage/ round. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. Updraft: Column of wind lifts you aloft. Vigor, Lesser: Creature heals 1 hp/round (max 15 rounds). Vine Strike: You can sneak attack plant creatures for 1 round. Wall of Smoke: Wall of black smoke obscures vision and nauseates those who pass through. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed. Winter Chill: Creature takes 1d6 cold damage and is fatigued. Wood Wose: Nature spirit does simple tasks for you.  2ND-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  254  Align Fang: Natural weapon becomes good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Avoid Planar Effects: Provides temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Balancing Lorecall: You gain a +4 bonus on Balance checks and can balance on difﬁcult surfaces if you have 5 or more ranks in Balance.  Binding Winds: Air prevents subject from moving, hinders ranged attacks. Bite of the Wererat: You gain the Dexterity and attacks of a wererat. Blinding Spittle: Ranged touch attack blinds subject. Blood Frenzy: Grants extra use of rage. Body of the Sun: Your body emanates ﬁre, dealing 1d4 ﬁre damage/2 levels. Brambles: Wooden weapon grows spikes that deal +1 damage/level (max +10). Briar Web: Area slows creatures and thorns deal 1 point of damage/5 ft. moved. Burrow: Subject can burrow with a speed of 30 feet. Camouﬂage, Mass: As camouﬂage, but multiple subjects. Cloud Wings: +30 ft. to subject’s ﬂy speed. Countermoon: Forces lycanthrope to its natural form. Creeping ColdF: Creature feels chill that increases with each round. Daggerspell Stance: You gain +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if you make a full attack, SR 5 + caster level if you ﬁght defensively, and DR 5/magic if you use the total defense action. Decomposition: Wounds deal 3 extra points of damage each round. Earthbind: Subject creature can’t ﬂy. Earthen Grace: Subject takes only nonlethal damage from stone and earth. Earthfast: Doubles the hit points of stone structure or rock formation and increases hardness to 10. Easy Trail: You make a temporary trail through any kind of undergrowth. Embrace the Wild: You gain an animal’s senses for 10 minutes/level. Fins to Feet: Transforms tails and ﬁns into legs and feet. Frost Breath: Icy breath deals 1d4 damage/2 levels. Healing Lorecall: If you have 5 or more ranks in Heal, you can remove harmful conditions with conjuration (healing) spells. Healing Sting: Touch deals 1d12 damage +1/level; caster gains damage as hp. Heartﬁre: Subjects outlined by ﬁre, take 1d4 damage/ round. Kelpstrand: Strands of kelp grapple foes. Listening Lorecall: You gain +4 on Listen checks, plus blindsense or blindsight if you have 5 or more ranks in Listen. Mark of the Outcast: Subject takes –5 penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and –2 penalty to AC. Master Air: You sprout insubstantial wings and can ﬂy. Mountain Stance: Subject becomes hard to move. Nature’s Favor: Animal touched gains luck bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls of +1/3 levels. One with the Land: Link with nature gives a +2 bonus on nature-related skill checks. Saltray: Ray deals 1d6 damage/2 levels and stuns. Scent: Grants the scent special ability. Share Husk: See and hear through the senses of a touched animal. Snake’s Swiftness, Mass: Allies each immediately make one attack.  Air Breathing: Subjects can breathe air freely. Align Fang, Mass: Allies’ natural weapons become good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Attune Form: Grant creature temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Bite of the Werewolf: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werewolf. Blindsight: Subject gains blindsight 30 ft. for 1 minute/ level. Bottle of SmokeF: Uncorking bottle creates fast horse made of smoke. Capricious Zephyr: Gale-force winds push creatures. Charge of the Triceratops: Subject grows horns and skull plate, gains gore attack. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Corona of Cold: Aura of cold protects you, damages others. Creaking Cacophony: Sound distracts and makes foes vulnerable to sonic damage. Crumble: You erode building or other structure. Dehydrate: Deals Con damage to subject. Downdraft: Flying creatures knocked down. Energy Vortex: Burst of energy centered on you damages nearby creatures. Entangling Staff: Quarterstaff can grapple and constrict foes. Fire Wings: Your arms become wings that enable ﬂight, deal 2d6 ﬁre damage. Fly, Swift: Gain ﬂy speed of 60 ft. for 1 round. Forestfold: Gain +10 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks in one type of terrain. Giant’s Wrath: Pebbles you throw become boulders. Girallon’s Blessing: Subject gains one additional pair of arms. Heatstroke: Subject creature takes nonlethal damage and becomes fatigued. Hypothermia: Causes 1d6 cold damage/level, fatigue. IcelanceF: Changes ice into lance, which attacks subject for 6d6 damage and stuns for 1d4 rounds. Infestation of Maggots: Touch attack deals 1d4 Con damage/round. Jagged Tooth: Doubles the critical threat range of natural weapons.  SPELL LISTS  3RD-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Junglerazer: Fey, vermin, plants, and animals take 1d10 damage/level. Lion’s Charge: You can make a full attack on a charge for 1 round. Nature’s Balance: You transfer 4 ability score points to the subject for 10 minutes/level. Nature’s RampartF: You mold the terrain to provide fortiﬁcations. Primal Form: You change into elemental, gain some abilities. Quillﬁre: Your hand sprouts poisonous quills useful for melee or ranged attacks. Resist Energy, Mass: Creatures ignore damage from speciﬁed energy type. Sink: Subject sinks in water, must make Swim checks. Snakebite: Your arm turns into poisonous snake you can use to attack. Snowshoes, Mass: As snowshoes, affects one creature/ level. Spiderskin: Subject gains increasing bonus to natural armor bonus, saves against poison, and Hide checks. Spikes: As brambles, but weapon gains +2 bonus and doubled threat range. Spirit Jaws: Ghostly jaws grapple creature, deal 2d6 damage. Standing Wave: Magically propels boat or swimming creature. Thornskin: Your unarmed attacks deal +1d6 damage; natural and unarmed attacks against you take 5 damage. Thunderous Roar: Roar deals 1d6 damage/2 levels, deafens. Treasure Scent: You detect valuable metals and gems. Tremor: Subjects knocked prone. Vigor: As lesser vigor, but 2 hp/round (max 25 rounds). Vigor, Mass Lesser: As lesser vigor, but multiple subjects (max 25 rounds). Vine Mine: Vines grow rapidly, giving various effects. Weather Eye: You accurate predict weather up to one week ahead.  CHAPTER 2  Splinterbolt: 4d6 piercing damage to subjects hit by ranged attack. Swim: Subject gains swim speed, +8 bonus on Swim checks. Tiger’s Tooth: One natural weapon of subject gets +1/4 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls (max +5) for 1 round. Train Animal: Affected animal gains additional tricks equal to 1/2 caster level for 1 hour/level. Wings of Air: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability improves by one step. Winter’s Embrace: Creature takes 1d8 cold damage/ round and might become exhausted. Wracking Touch: Deal 1d6 damage +1/level; you also deal sneak attack damage if you have any.  4TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Arc of Lightning: Line of electricity arcs between two creatures (1d6/level damage). Bite of the Wereboar: You gain the Strength and attacks of a wereboar. Blindsight, Greater: Subject gains blindsight 60 ft. for 1 minute/level. Burrow, Mass: As burrow, but affects 1/level subjects. Chain of Eyes: See through other creatures’ eyes. Contagious Touch: You infect one creature/round with chosen disease. Contingent Energy Resistance: Energy damage triggers a resist energy spell. Creeping Cold, Greater F: As creeping cold, but longer duration and more damage. Enhance Wild Shape: Your wild shape ability gains a bonus. Essence of the Raptor: Base speed becomes 60 feet, gain skill bonuses and scent. Eye of the Hurricane: Storm pushes creatures, calm at center.  255  Illus. by W. England  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  256  Jaws of the WolfF: One carving/2 levels turns into a worg. Wings of Air, Greater: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability Land Womb: You and one creature/level hide within the improves by two steps. Wood Rot: Destroy wooden items or deal 3d6 damage + earth. Languor: Ray slows subject and diminishes its Strength. 1/level (max +15) to plant creatures. Last Breath M: Reincarnate recently deceased creature with no level loss. 5TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS Lay of the Land: You gain an overview of the geography Anticold Sphere: Sphere hedges out cold creatures and around you. protects you from cold. Magic Fang, Superior: Your natural weapons gain +1 Bite of the Weretiger: You gain the Strength and attacks enhancement bonus/4 levels. of a weretiger. Miasma of Entropy: Rot Cloak of the Sea: Gain all natural materials blur,freedomofmovement, in 30-ft. cone-shaped and water breathing while burst. in water. Moon Bolt: 1d4 Strength Cold Snap: You lower damage/3 levels; temperature in area. undead made helpless. Contagion, Mass: As Murderous Mist: Steam contagion, but 20-ft. deals 2d6 damage, radius. blinds creatures. Dance of the Unicorn: Perinarch: Gain greater Purifying mist washes control over Limbo’s the air clean of smoke, morphic essence. dust, and poisons. Planar Tolerance: Dire Hunger: Subject Provides long-term grows fangs, attacks protection against creatures near it. overtly damaging Echo Skull: See, hear, planar traits. and speak through a Poison Vines: Vines prepared animal skull grow and poison for 1 hour/level. creatures stuck within Fireward: As quench, but them. also suppresses magical Resistance, Greater: ﬁre effects in affected Subject gains +3 on area. saving throws. Freeze: Ray immobilizes Rushing Waters: Wave subject and deals 6d6 makes bull rush attack. cold damage/round. Shadowblast: Blast of Heal Animal light stuns and damages Companion: As heal on natives to the Plane of your animal companion. Shadow. Most druids use a sprig of mistletoe or holly for their focus, but others Ice Flowers: Ice and Sheltered Vitality: choose a different symbol for their devotion to nature earth deal 1d6 damage/ Subject gains immunity level. to fatigue, exhaustion, ability damage, and ability drain. Inferno: Creature bursts into ﬂames and takes ﬁre damage Spark of Life: Undead creature loses most immunities. per round. Starvation: Hunger pangs deal 1d6 damage/level, cause Jungle’s Rapture: Curse causes 1d6 Dexterity drain. fatigue. Mantle of the Icy SoulM: Touched creature gains the cold Sudden Stalagmite: Impaling stalagmite damages and subtype. holds foes. Memory Rot: Spores deal 1d6 Int damage to subject, plus 1 Summon Elementite Swarm: Summon an elementite Int drain/round. swarm to follow your commands. Owl’s Insight: Subject gains Wis bonus equal to half your Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple level for 1 hour. subjects. Panacea: Removes most afﬂictions. Swim, Mass: As swim, but one creature/level. Phantom Stag: Magic stag appears for 1 hour/level. Vortex of Teeth: 3d8 points of damage due to force per Plant Body: Subject’s type changes to plant. round to all creatures in the area. Poison Thorns: You grow thorns that poison your Wall of Water: Creates shapeable transparent wall of attackers. water. Quill Blast: You ﬂing quills in spread, dealing damage and Wild Runner: Change into centaur, gain some abilities. imposing penalties. Wind at Back: Doubles overland speed of subjects for 12 Rejuvenation Cocoon: Energy cocoon shields creature, hours. then heals it.  Anger of the Noonday Sun: Blinds creatures within 20 ft., damages undead. Animate Snow: You animate snow to attack foes. Aspect of the Earth Hunter: Change into bulette and gain some of its abilities. Bite of the Werebear: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werebear. Blood Sirocco: Wind bowls over foes and draws away their blood. Cometfall: Comet falls atop foes, damaging them and knocking them prone. Dinosaur Stampede: Spectral dinosaurs deal 1d12 damage +1/level. Drown: Subject immediately begins to drown. Energy Immunity: Subject and equipment gain immunity to damage of speciﬁed energy type. Enveloping Cocoon: Entraps subject creature and denies save for attached spell. Extract Water Elemental: Pulls water from victim, forms water elemental. Fires of Purity: Subject bursts into magical ﬂame, becoming a dangerous weapon. Hide the Path F: Area warded against divinations. Hungry Gizzard: Gizzard engulfs victim, grapples and deals damage. Miasma: Gas ﬁlls creature’s mouth, suffocating it. Phantasmal Disorientation: Fools creature’s sense of direction, making movement difﬁcult. Stonehold: Stony arm trap grapples and damages creatures. Summon Greater Elemental: Summon a greater elemental to follow your commands. Resistance, Superior: Subject gains +6 on saving throws. Tidal Surge: Wave of water deals 1d6/level damage and bull rushes. Tortoise Shell: Creature gains +6 natural armor, +1/3 levels above 11th. Vigorous Circle: As mass lesser vigor, but 3 hp/round (max 40 rounds).  7TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Aura of Vitality: Subjects gain +4 to Str, Dex, and Con. Brilliant Blade: Weapon or projectiles shed light, ignore armor. Cloudwalkers: Subjects can ﬂy outdoors at speed of 60 ft. Master Earth: Travel through the earth to any location. Shifting Paths: Illusion hides path, creates false new path.  8TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Awaken, MassX: As awaken, but multiple creatures. Bombardment: Falling rocks deal 1d8 damage/level and bury subjects. Brilliant Aura: Allies’ weapons become brilliant energy, ignoring armor. Cocoon X: Preserves a corpse and reincarnates with no loss of level. Deadfall: Falling wood causes damage and knocks foes prone. Maelstrom: Water vortex traps and damages creatures and objects. Phantom Wolf: Incorporeal wolf ﬁghts for you. Red Tide: Nauseating water knocks foes prone and deals Strength damage. Stormrage: You can ﬂy and ﬁre lightning from your eyes. Unyielding Roots: Creature grows roots that keep it stationary and heal it every round.  SPELL LISTS  6TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Slime Wave: Creates a 15-ft. spread of green slime. Storm of Elemental Fury: Magic cloud creates windstorm, then hail of stones, then rainstorm, then ﬂame. Storm Tower: Swirling clouds absorb electricity and magic missiles and prevent ranged attacks. Swamp Lung: Water in lungs makes subject helpless, diseased. Waterspout: Waterspout you control picks up and damages foes. Word of Balance: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or nauseates nonneutral creatures.  CHAPTER 2  Sirine’s Grace: You gain bonuses to Charisma and Dexterity, AC, and Perform checks, and can breathe water. Stone Shape, Greater: Sculpts 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./level of stone into any shape. Swamp Stride: As tree stride, but with bodies of water. Vigor, Greater: As lesser vigor, but 4 hp/round. Wall of Sand: Swirling sand blocks ranged attacks, slows movement through. Wind Tunnel: Ranged weapons gain +5 bonus and double range increment.  9TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Cast in Stone: Petrifying gaze attack. Death Ward, Mass: As death ward, but more subjects. Drown, Mass: As drown, but affects multiple subjects. Nature’s Avatar: Animal gains +10 on attack rolls and damage rolls, haste, and 1d8 hp/level. Perinarch, Planar: Gain control over a small area of any divinely morphic plane. Phantom Bear: Incorporeal bear ﬁghts for you. Shadow Landscape: Makes natural terrain more dangerous, creates guardians that you command. Summon Elemental Monolith M: Calls powerful elemental creature to ﬁght for you. Transmute Rock to Lava: Transforms one 10-ft. cube with subsequent ﬁre damage and effects. Tsunami: Massive wave deals 1d6 damage/level. Undermaster M: You gain earth-related spell-like abilities. Whirlwind, Greater: As whirlwind, but larger and more destructive.  PALADIN SPELLS 1ST-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS  Axiomatic Water M: Makes lawful-aligned axiomatic water. Bless Weapon, Swift: Weapon strikes true against evil foes for 1 round. Blessed Aim: +2 bonus for allies’ ranged attacks.  257  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  258  Clear Mind: +4 on saves against mind-affecting spells and abilities. Deafening Clang: Weapon deals sonic damage, deafens. Divine Sacriﬁce: You sacriﬁce hit points to deal extra damage. Energized Shield, Lesser: Shield provides user resistance 5, shield bash deals +1d6 damage. Faith Healing: Cures 8 hp +1/level (max +5) to worshiper of your deity. Find Temple: You know direction of your deity’s nearest temple. Golden Barding: Your mount gets force armor. Grave Strike: You can sneak attack undead for 1 round. Holy Spurs: Special mount’s speed increases by 40 ft. for 1 round. Know Greatest Enemy: Determines relative power level of creatures within the area. Lionheart: Subject gains immunity to fear. Moment of Clarity: Subject gains second save against mind-affecting spell or ability. One Mind, Lesser: You gain +4 on Spot and Listen checks while mounted. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Resurgence: You grant subject a second chance at a saving throw. Rhino’s Rush: Next charge deals double damage. Second Wind: Dispel fatigue, grant bonus on Constitution checks.  Sense Heretic: Glow reveals when evil creature is near. Silverbeard: You grow a hard silver beard that gives +2 bonus to armor. Sticky Saddle: You become stuck to special mount, gain +10 Ride checks. Strategic Charge: You gain the beneﬁts of the Mobility feat. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. Vision of Glory: Subject gains morale bonus equal to your Cha modiﬁer to one saving throw. Warning Shout: Allies are no longer ﬂat-footed.  2ND-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS  Angelskin: Lawful good creature gains DR 5/evil. Aura of Glory: Remove any fear effect from allies. Awaken Sin: Subject faces its sins, takes 1d6/level nonlethal damage (10d6 max). Checkmate’s Light: Your weapon becomes a +1 axiomatic weapon and bolsters the morale of allies. Cloak of Bravery: You and your allies gain a bonus on saves against fear. Divine Insight: You gain insight bonus of 5 + caster level on one single skill check. Divine Protection: Allies gain +1 to AC, saves. Energized Shield: Shield provides user resistance 10, shield bash deals +2d6 damage. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Flame of Faith: Gives weapon the ﬂaming burst special ability.  Spiritual chariot allows a mount to run unencumbered by the rider  SPELL LISTS  3RD-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS  Lawful Sword: Weapon becomes +5 axiomatic weapon and emits magic circle against chaos. Revenance: Restores dead creature to life for 1 minute/ level. Righteous Aura: You detonate on death, healing good creatures and damaging others (2d6/level damage). Sacred Haven: Creatures gain +2 AC, retain Dex bonus, and you can lay on hands at range. Telepathic Aura: One-way mental communication to allies within 100 feet. Visage of the Deity, Lesser: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. Winged Mount: Your mount grows wings and ﬂies at speed of 60 ft.  CHAPTER 2  Hand of Divinity: Gives +2 sacred or profane saving throw bonus to worshiper of your deity. Holy Mount: Special mount gains celestial template. Knight’s Move: You instantly move to ﬂank a subject. Loyal Vassal: Ally gains +3 against mind-affecting spells and abilities and cannot be compelled to harm you. One Mind: As lesser one mind, but also gain +2 to attack while mounted. Quick March: Allies’ speed increases by 30 ft. for 1 round. Shield of Warding: Shield grants +1 bonus on AC and Reﬂex saves/5 levels (max +5). Spiritual Chariot: Creates ghostly chariot behind your mount. Stabilize: Cures 1 point of damage to all creatures in area. Strength of Stone: +8 Str bonus that ends if you lose contact with the ground. Zeal: You move through foes to attack the enemy you want.  RANGER SPELLS 1ST-LEVEL  Illus. by R. Spears  Axiomatic Storm M: LawfulRANGER SPELLS aligned rain falls in 20-ft. Accelerated Movement: radius. Blessing of Bahamut: You Balance, Climb, or gain damage reduction Move Silently at 10/magic. normal speed with no Diamondsteel M: Metal armor penalty on skill check. Arrow Mind: You provides damage reduction. Find the Gap: Your attacks threaten nearby squares ignore armor and natural with your bow and ﬁre armor. without provoking attacks A ranger’s spells can make potent weapons Hand of the Faithful: Immobile zone of of opportunity. Aspect of the Wolf: You change warding stuns those worshiping different into a wolf and gain some of its abilities. deities from yours. Holy Storm M: Good-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Blades of Fire: Your melee weapons deal +1d8 ﬁre damage Mantle of Good/Law: You gain SR 12 + caster level for 1 round. Bloodhound: You gain an immediate retry if you fail a against spells with opposite alignment descriptor. One Mind, Greater: As one mind, but also gain +2 to Survival check while tracking. Branch to Branch: You gain +10 competence bonus on damage while mounted. Regal Procession: As mount, but you summon several Climb checks in trees and can brachiate through forest. Camouﬂage: Grants +10 bonus on Hide checks. mounts. Resurgence, Mass: As resurgence, but multiple subjects. Claws of the Bear: Your hands become weapons that deal Righteous Fury: Gain temporary hp, +4 to Strength. 1d8 damage. Seek Eternal Rest: Turn undead as cleric of your level. Climb Walls: Touched creature gains increased climbing Undead Bane Weapon: Weapon gains undead bane ability. Crabwalk: Touched creature gains bonus while charging. property and is considered good-aligned. Weapon of the Deity: Your weapon gains enhancement Dawn: Sleeping/unconscious creatures in area awaken. Deep Breath: Your lungs are ﬁlled with air. bonus and special ability. Word of Binding: Magical manacles restrain foe. Detect Favored Enemy: You know if favored enemies are within 60 ft. Easy Trail: You make a temporary trail through any kind 4TH-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS of undergrowth. Castigate: Verbal rebuke damages those whose alignment Embrace the Wild: You gain an animal’s senses for 10 differs from yours. minutes/level. Draconic Might: Gain +5 to Str, Con, Cha; +4 natural Enrage Animal: Animal rages like barbarian, not armor; immunity to magic sleep effects and paralysis. fatigued. Favor of The Martyr: Subject gains immunity to Guided Shot: You ignore distance, cover, concealment nonlethal damage, charm and compulsion effects, and penalties with your ranged attacks for 1 round. other adverse conditions.  259  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Hawkeye: Increase range increments by 50%, +5 on Spot checks. Healing Lorecall: If you have 5 or more ranks in Heal, you can remove harmful conditions with conjuration (healing) spells. Horrible Taste: Touched creature or object nauseates biting or swallowing foes. Hunter’s Mercy: Your next hit with a bow is automatically a critical hit. Instant Search: Make Search check at +2 as free action. Lay of the Land: You gain an overview of the geography around you. Lightfoot: Your move does not provoke attacks of opportunity for 1 round. Living Prints: You perceive tracks as if they had just been made. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Marked Object: You gain bonus to track a speciﬁc being. Naturewatch: As deathwatch, but on animals and plants. Omen of PerilF: You know how dangerous the future will be. Ram’s Might: Gain +2 to Strength and your unarmed attacks deal normal damage. Rapid Burrowing: +20 ft. to subject’s burrow speed. Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Rhino’s Rush: Next charge deals double damage. Scent: Grants the scent special ability. Smell of Fear: Subject’s aroma attracts animal attacks. Sniper’s Shot: No range limit on next ranged sneak attack. Snowshoes: Subject walks easily on ice and snow. Stalking Brand: Subject marked with symbol you can see despite disguises. Surefoot: +10 bonus on Balance, Climb, Jump, and Tumble checks. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Towering Oak: +10 bonus on Intimidate checks. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. Vine Strike: You can sneak attack plant creatures for 1 round. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed.  2ND-LEVEL RANGER SPELLS  260  Align Fang: Natural weapon becomes good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Balancing Lorecall: You gain a +4 bonus on Balance checks and can balance on difﬁcult surfaces if you have 5 or more ranks in Balance. Briar Web: Area slows creatures and thorns deal 1 point of damage/5 ft. moved. Burrow: Subject can burrow with a speed of 30 feet. Camouﬂage, Mass: As camouﬂage, but multiple subjects. Curse of Impending Blades: Subject takes –2 penalty to AC. Easy Climb: You make a vertical surface easy to climb (DC 10).  Exacting Shot: Your ranged weapon automatically conﬁrms critical hits against favored enemies. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Haste, Swift: Move faster, +1 on attacks, AC, Reﬂex saves. Jagged Tooth: Doubles the critical threat range of natural weapons. Lion’s Charge: You can make a full attack on a charge for 1 round. Listening Lorecall: You gain +4 on Listen checks, plus blindsense or blindsight if you have 5 or more ranks in Listen. Nature’s Favor: Animal touched gains luck bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls of +1/3 levels. One with the Land: Link with nature gives a +2 bonus on nature-related skill checks. Train Animal: Affected animal gains additional tricks equal to 1/2 caster level for 1 hour/level. Tremorsense: Grants tremorsense to a range of 30 feet.  3RD-LEVEL RANGER SPELLS  Align Fang, Mass: Allies’ natural weapons become good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Arrow Storm: You make one ranged attack against each foe within one range increment. Blade Storm: You make melee attacks against every foe you threaten. Blade Thirst: Slashing weapon glows and gains +3 bonus. Bottle of SmokeF: Uncorking bottle creates fast horse made of smoke. Burrow, Mass: As burrow, but affects 1/level subjects. Charge of the Triceratops: Subject grows horns and skull plate, gains gore attack. Curse of Impending Blades, Mass: Enemies take –2 penalty to AC. Decoy Image: Figment mimics you and allies. Find the Gap: Your attacks ignore armor and natural armor. Forestfold: You gain +10 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks in one type of terrain. Heal Animal Companion: As heal on your animal companion. Mark of the Hunter: Rune on creature makes it easier to attack. Nature’s RampartF: You mold the terrain to provide fortiﬁcations. Phantasmal Decoy: Creates illusory enemy for foe to chase. Safe Clearing: As sanctuary, but protects an area and lasts 1 hour/level. Snowshoes, Mass: As snowshoes, affects one creature/ level.  4TH-LEVEL RANGER SPELLS  Aspect of the Earth Hunter: Change into bulette and gain some of its abilities. Deeper Darkvision: Subject can see 90 ft. in magical darkness. Foebane: Your weapon becomes +5 and deals +2d6 damage against a favored enemy.  0-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS (CANTRIPS) Conj  Caltrops: Creates caltrops in 5-ft.-by-5-ft. square, + 5-ft. square/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5). Evoc Electric Jolt: Ranged touch attack deals 1d3 electricity damage. Sonic Snap: Subject takes 1 point of sonic damage and is deafened 1 round. Illus Silent Portal: Negates sound from door or window. Trans Amanuensis: Copy nonmagical text. Launch Bolt: Launches a crossbow bolt up to 80 ft. Launch Item: Hurls Fine item up to Medium range. Repair Minor Damage: Repairs 1 point of damage to any construct. Stick: Glues an object weighing 5 pounds or less to another object.  1ST-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Dispel Ward: As dispel magic, but affects only wards. Ectoplasmic Armor: Gain armor bonus against incorporeal touch attacks. Ironguts: Subject gains +5 bonus on saving throws against poison. Nightshield: You gain resistance bonus on saves, and spell absorbs magic missile damage. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Conj Benign Transposition: Two willing subjects switch places. Blades of Fire: Your melee weapons deal +1d8 ﬁre damage for 1 round. Buzzing Bee: Bee gives subject –10 penalty on Move Silently and hinders Concentration checks.  SPELL LISTS  SORCERER/ WIZARD SPELLS  Corrosive Grasp: 1 touch/level deals 1d8 acid damage. Deep Breath: Your lungs are ﬁlled with air. Hail of StoneM: Stones deal 1d4 points of damage/ level to creatures in the area (max 5d4). Orb of Acid, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 acid damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Cold, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 cold damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Electricity, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 electricity damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Fire, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 ﬁre damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Sound, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d6 sonic damage + 1d6/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d6). Summon Undead I: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Wall of Smoke: Wall of black smoke obscures vision and nauseates those who pass through. Appraising Touch: Gain +10 bonus on Appraise Div checks. Arrow Mind: You threaten nearby squares with your bow and ﬁre without provoking attacks of opportunity. Critical Strike: For 1 round you gain +1d6 damage, doubled threat range, and +4 on attack rolls to conﬁrm critical threats. Golem Strike: You can sneak attack constructs for 1 round. Guided Shot: You ignore distance, cover, concealment penalties with your ranged attacks for 1 round. Insightful Feint: Gain +10 on your next Bluff check to feint in combat. Instant Locksmith: Make Disable Device or Open Lock check at +2 as free action. Instant Search: Make Search check at +2 as free action. Master’s Touch: You gain proﬁciency in a weapon or shield touched for 1 minute/level. Sniper’s Shot: No range limit on next ranged sneak attack. Spontaneous Search: Instantly Search area as if having taken 10. Targeting Ray: You and allies are +1 to hit/3 levels against subject. Ench Distract: Subjects take –4 on Concentration, Listen, Search, and Spot. Distract Assailant: One creature is ﬂat-footed for 1 round. Incite: Subjects can’t ready actions or delay. Inhibit: Subject delays until next round. Shock and Awe: Flat-footed creatures get –10 on initiative. Evoc Blood Wind: Subject uses natural weapons at range.  CHAPTER 2  Implacable Pursuer: You know where prey is, as long as it’s moving. Land Womb: You and one creature/level hide within the earth. Magic Fang, Superior: Your natural weapons gain +1 enhancement bonus/4 levels. Planar Tolerance: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Snakebite: Your arm turns into poisonous snake you can use to attack. Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple subjects. Swamp Stride: As tree stride, but with bodies of water. Wild Runner: Change into centaur, gain some abilities.  261  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  262  Guiding Light: +2 on ranged attacks against creatures in illuminated area. Ice Dagger: Grenadelike weapon deals subject 1d4/level cold damage, plus area damage. Light of Lunia: You radiate silvery light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage. Luminous Gaze: Your eyes emit light, dazzle creatures. Persistent Blade: Blade of force attacks subject, automatically ﬂanks. Ray of Flame: Ray deals 1d6/2 levels ﬁre damage, ignites subject. Sonic Blast: Subject takes 1d4/2 levels sonic damage plus deafness. Thunderhead: Small lightning bolts deal 1 damage/round. Illus Dead End: Removes spoor of one creature/level. Net of Shadows: Ordinary shadows that provide concealment to all in the area. Serene Visage: Gain insight bonus on Bluff checks equal to half your level. Necro Backbiter: Weapon strikes wielder. Spirit Worm: Subject takes 1 point Con damage every round for 1 round/level. Trans Accelerated Movement: Balance, Climb, or Move Silently at normal speed with no penalty on skill check. Babau Slime: Secrete a body-covering acid that damages attacking foes. Breath Flare: Your breath weapon dazzles subjects. Cheat: Caster rerolls when determining the success of a game of chance. Cutting Hand: Your hand gains a +2 enhancement bonus and deals 1d6 damage. Ebon Eyes: Subject can see through magical darkness. Expeditious Retreat, Swift: Your speed increases by 30 ft. for 1 round. Fist of Stone: Gain +6 Str and natural slam attack. Horrible Taste: Touched creature or object nauseates biting or swallowing foes. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Mage Hand, Greater: As mage hand, but medium range and up to 40 lb. Nerveskitter: Subject gains +5 bonus on initiative checks. Portal Beacon: You grant others knowledge of a magic portal’s location. Raging Flame: Fires burn twice as hot, half as long. Ray of Clumsiness: Victim takes 1d6 Dexterity penalty +1/2 levels. Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Repair Light Damage: Repairs 1d8 damage +1/ level (max +5) to any construct. Scatterspray: Group of small objects ﬂies apart in a burst. Shieldbearer: Shield ﬂoats near subject to offer protection. Slide: Move subject 5 feet.  Univ  Slow Burn: Fires burn twice as long. Spell Flower: Hold the charge on one touch spell per forelimb. Weapon Shift: Touched weapon changes form. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed. Familiar Pocket: Garment or container becomes extradimensional safe haven for your familiar.  2ND-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Aiming at the Target: +10 bonus on Concentration checks for previously cast spell. Alarm, Greater F: As alarm, and it works on coexistent planes. Daggerspell Stance: You gain +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if you make a full attack, SR 5 + caster level if you ﬁght defensively, and DR 5/magic if you use the total defense action. Dissonant Chant: Concentration checks more difﬁcult within area of spell. Distracting Ray: Ray forces spellcaster to make Concentration check. Earth Lock M: Constricts tunnel, preventing access. Ectoplasmic Feedback: Incorporeal attackers take 1d6 damage + 1/level. Portal Alarm: You are alerted when a creature passes through a warded portal. Scintillating Scales: Your natural armor bonus turns into a deﬂection bonus. Conj Baleful Transposition: Two subjects switch places. Cloud of Bewilderment: Generates a nauseating 10-ft. cube. Create Magic TattooM: Subject receives a magic tattoo with various effects. Ice Knife: Magical shard of ice deals 2d8 cold damage plus 2 Dex damage, or deals 1d8 cold damage in 10-ft.-radius burst. Inky Cloud: Obscures sight underwater beyond 5 ft. Malevolent Miasma: Cloud of fog deals 1d4 nonlethal damage/level. Summon Undead II: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Balancing Lorecall: You gain a +4 bonus on Div Balance checks and can balance on difﬁcult surfaces if you have 5 or more ranks in Balance. Chain of Eyes: See through other creatures’ eyes. Discern Shapechanger M: Penetrates disguises and identiﬁes shapechanging creatures. Marked Object: You gain bonus to track a speciﬁc being. Ench Entice Gift: Subject gives caster what it’s holding. Mechanus Mind: Reformat subject’s mind to be coldly calculating. Mindless Rage: Subject compelled to attack you physically for 1 round/level.  SPELL LISTS  Few wooden doors can withstand a battering ram spell  CHAPTER 2  Necro BoneﬁddleF: Spectral ﬁddle bow deals 3d6 damage/round. Curse of Impending Blades: Subject takes –2 penalty to AC. Death Armor F: Black aura damages creatures attacking you. Desiccating Bubble: Globe of air damages by evaporating moisture from subject. Ghoul Glyph: Glyph wards area, paralyzes victims. Life Bolt: 1 ray/2 levels draws 1 hp from you to deal 1d12 damage to undead. Ray of Sickness: Subject becomes sickened. Ray of Weakness: Subject takes –2 on attacks, –10 ft. speed. Shroud of Undeath: Negative energy shroud makes undead perceive you as undead. Spawn Screen: Subject resists being transformed into an undead spawn if slain. Stolen Breath: Subject has wind knocked out of it. Wracking Touch: Deal 1d6 damage +1/level; you also deal sneak attack damage if you have any. Trans Augment Familiar: Your familiar becomes more powerful. Balor Nimbus: Your ﬂaming body damages foes in grapple. Belker Claws: Touch attack deals 2d12 damage and lingers +1 round/3 levels. Body of the Sun: Your body emanates ﬁre, dealing 1d4 ﬁre damage/2 levels. Bristle: Armor spikes attack with wearer. Earthbind: Subject creature can’t ﬂy. Earthen Grasp: Arm made of earth and soil grapples foes. Extend Tentacles: +5 ft. to reach of tentacle attack. Fearsome Grapple: You grow tentacles that help you grapple.  Illus. by J. Nelson  Ray of Stupidity: Victim takes 1d4+1 Intelligence damage. Rebuke: Subject is dazed 1 round, then shaken. Sting Ray: Subject of ray can take only standard or move action, has –2 AC, and must make Concentration checks to cast spells. Evoc Battering Ram: Deals 1d6 damage plus bull rush. Blast of Force: Attack deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). Burning Sword: Weapon gains ﬂaming burst special ability. Combust: Subject takes 1d8/level ﬁre damage and might catch ﬁre. Electric Loop: Deals 1d6/2 levels electricity damage plus stunning to a single creature. Ethereal Chamber: You entrap an ethereal subject in a chamber of force. Fireburst: Creatures within 10 feet take 1d8/level ﬁre damage. Flame Dagger: Beam of ﬁre deals 1d4 damage +1/ level. Force LadderF: Creates an immobile ladder of force. Frost Breath: Icy breath deals 1d4 damage/2 levels. Light of Mercuria: You radiate golden light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage, 2d6 against undead and evil outsiders. Rainbow Beam F: Ray dazzles and deals 1d12 damage/3 levels of random type. Ray of Ice: Ray deals 1d6 cold damage/2 levels. Scorch: Jet of ﬂame deals 1d8/2 levels (max 5d8). Slapping Hand: Hand makes creature provoke attacks of opportunity. Snowball Swarm: Snowballs deal 2d6 points of cold damage in 10-ft. burst. Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment. Illus Bladeweave: Your melee attack dazes your opponent. Cloak Pool: Hide a color pool on the Astral Plane from view. Dark Way: Creates temporary unbreakable bridge supporting up to 200 lb./level. Delusions of Grandeur: Subject thinks it is better than it is. Discolor Pool: Change the color of a color pool on the Astral Plane. Disguise Undead: Change appearance of one corporeal undead. Phantasmal Assailants: Nightmare creatures strike subject for 8 Wis damage, 8 Dex damage. Phantom FoeM: Subject is always ﬂanked by one creature. Reﬂective Disguise: Viewers see you as their own species and gender. Shadow Mask: Grants +4 on saves against light spells, protection from gaze attacks. Shadow Radiance: Area ﬁlled with intense light that grows brighter. Shadow Spray: Deals 4 points of Str damage and dazes. Wall of Gloom: Shadow barrier obscures vision.  263  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Fins to Feet: Transforms tails and ﬁns into legs and feet. Fly, Swift: Gain ﬂy speed of 60 ft. for 1 round. Fuse Arms: Multiple arms/tentacles become one pair of stronger limbs. Ghost Touch Armor: Armor works normally against incorporeal attacks. Heroics: Fighter gains one ﬁghter bonus feat. Hurl: Thrown weapon returns to thrower. Infernal Wound: Weapon deals persistent, bleeding wounds. Ironthunder Horn: Intense vibrations trip those in area. Lively Step: You and allies gain +10 increase to speed. Mountain Stance: Subject becomes hard to move. Quick Potion: Creates a potion that must be used within 1 hour/level. Razorfangs: Your bite or claw attack threatens a critical hit on a 19 or 20. Repair Moderate Damage: Repairs 2d8 damage +1/level (max +10) to any construct. Scale Weakening: Subject’s natural armor weakens. Slide, Greater: Move subject 20 feet. Snake’s Swiftness: Subject immediately makes one attack. Sonic Weapon: Weapon touched deals +1d6 sonic damage with each hit. Speak to Allies: Subjects can converse at distance without moving lips. Stone Bones: Corporeal undead gains +3 natural armor bonus. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Swim: Subject gains swim speed, +8 bonus on Swim checks. Whirling Blade: Hurled slashing weapon magically attacks all foes in 60-ft. line. Wings of Air: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability improves by one step. Wraithstrike: Your melee attacks strike as touch attacks for 1 round.  3RD-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELL  264  Abjur Anticipate Teleportation F: Predict and delay the arrival of creatures teleporting into range by 1 round. Antidragon AuraM: Allies gain bonus to AC and saves against dragons. Avoid Planar Effects: Provides temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Earthen Grace: Subject takes only nonlethal damage from stone and earth. Eradicate Earth: Deals 1d8 points of damage/level to earth creatures (max 10d8). Reverse Arrows: As protection from arrows, but negated arrows turn back upon their source.  Sign of SealingM: Magical sigil protects door or chest, deals 1d4/level damage (max 10d4) if opened. Conj Acid Breath: Cone of acid deals 1d6 damage/level (max 10d6). Bands of Steel: Metallic bands immobilize or entangle subject for 1 round/level. Contagious Fog: 20-ft.-radius cloud of fog inﬂicts disease. Corpse Candle: Ghostly hand and candle sheds light, affects incorporeal creatures. IcelanceF: Changes ice into lance, which attacks subject for 6d6 damage and stuns for 1d4 rounds. Mage Armor, Greater: Gives subject +6 armor bonus. Mage Armor, Mass: As mage armor, but one creature/level. Nauseating Breath: Exhale a cone of nauseating gas. Regal Procession: As mount, but you summon several mounts. Servant Horde: Create 2d6 unseen servants +1/ level (max +15). Summon Undead III: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Vipergout: You spit forth celestial or ﬁendish vipers that attack your foes. Analyze Portal: Find a nearby portal and discover Div its properties. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Telepathic Bond, Lesser: Link with subject within 30 ft. for 10 minutes/level. Unluck: Subject remakes all rolls, uses worse result for 1 round/level. Ench Mesmerizing Glare: Your gaze fascinates creatures. Miser’s Envy: Subject jealously covets nearby object. Ray of Dizziness: Subject can take only move or standard actions. Suppress Breath Weapon: Subject can’t use its breath weapon. Evoc Blacklight: Create an area of total darkness. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Capricious Zephyr: Gale-force winds push creatures. Chain Missile: Multiple missiles deal 1d4+1 damage each, then strike secondary targets. Flashburst: Flash of light dazzles and blinds creatures in area. Glowing OrbF: Creates permanent magical light; you control brightness. Great Thunderclap: Loud noise causes stunning, deafness, and knocks prone in a large area. Hailstones: Frigid globes deal 5d6 cold damage. Light of Venya: You radiate pearly light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 2d6 damage, 4d6 against undead and evil outsiders.  SPELL LISTS  Diamondsteel M: Metal armor provides damage reduction. Dolorous Blow: Weapon’s threat range is doubled and threats are automatically conﬁrmed. Dragonskin: You gain a bonus to natural armor plus energy resistance 10. False Gravity: Travel on a solid surface as if that surface had its own gravity. Giant’s Wrath: Pebbles you throw become boulders. Girallon’s Blessing: Subject gains one additional pair of arms. Hamatula Barbs: Subjects grow barbs, which damage foes that attack subject in melee. Primal Form: You change into elemental, gain some abilities. Repair Serious Damage: Repairs 3d8 damage +1/ level (max +15) to any construct. Rust Ray: Metal objects take 2d6 damage +1/2 levels. Shadow Phase: Subject becomes partially incorporeal. Snake’s Swiftness, Mass: Allies each immediately make one attack. Spell Vulnerability: Reduce creature’s spell resistance by 1/caster level (max reduction 15). Spiderskin: Subject gains increasing bonus to natural armor, saves against poison, and Hide checks. Steeldance: Blades hover around you and attack foes. Stony Grasp: Arm made of soil and rock grapples foes. Tremorsense: Grants tremorsense to a range of 30 feet. Weapon of Energy: Weapon deals extra energy damage. Weapon of Impact: As keen edge, but aids bludgeoning weapons. Univ Enhance Familiar: Your familiar receives +2 bonus on saves, combat rolls, and AC for 1 hour/level. Fortify Familiar: Your familiar gains 2d8 temporary hp, +2 to armor, 25% chance to avoid extra sneak attack and critical hit damage.  CHAPTER 2  Manyjaws: One set of jaws/level attacks enemies for 1d6 damage. Rainbow BlastF: Line deals 1d6 damage of each energy type. Resonating Bolt: Sonic energy deals 1d4 damage/ level (max 10d4). Scintillating Sphere: 20-ft.-radius burst deals 1d6 electricity/level. Shatterﬂoor: Deals 1d4 sonic/level plus damages ﬂoor surface. Sonorous Hum: Removes need to concentrate to maintain next spell cast. Sound Lance: Sonic energy deals 1d8/level damage. Wall of Light: Creates wall of light, can dazzle creatures. Illus Claws of Darkness: Claws deal 1d8 cold damage and have reach. Cone of Dimness: Subjects believe they are engulfed in magical darkness. Shadow Binding: Ribbonlike shadows entangle creatures in 10-ft.-radius burst. Shadow Cache: You open a small portal to the Plane of Shadow through which you can put an item for later retrieval. Spectral Weapon: Use quasi-real weapon to make touch attacks. Suspended SilenceM: Object becomes programmed to create an area of silence at your command. Necro Curse of Impending Blades, Mass: Enemies take –2 penalty to AC. Disrupt Undead, Greater: As disrupt undead, but 1d8 damage/level. Healing Touch: Heal subject 1d6/2 levels, but take damage equal to half. Incorporeal Enhancement: Grant bonuses to incorporeal undead. Junglerazer: Fey, vermin, plants, and animals take 1d10 damage/level. Mind Poison: Your poisonous touch deals Wis damage. Skull Watch: Skull shrieks when creature enters warded area. Spider Poison: Touch deals 1d6 Str damage, repeats in 1 minute. Undead Lieutenant: Chosen undead can give orders to undead in your control. Undead Torch: Undead creature gains blue aura that gives +2d6 damage against living creatures. Trans Air Breathing: Subjects can breathe air freely. Amorphous Form: Subject becomes puddlelike and can slip through cracks quickly. Bite of the Wererat: You gain the Dexterity and attacks of a wererat. Deeper Darkvision: Subject can see 90 ft. in magical darkness. Demon Dirge: Demons are stunned and take 3d6 damage/round for 1d4 rounds. Devil Blight: Damage and stun baatezu; damage other lawful and evil creatures.  4TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Dispelling Screen: Targeted dispel magic on any creatures and unattended items, +10 max on caster level check. Forceward: Creates a sphere of force that protects against force effects and keeps out incorporeal creatures. Portal Alarm, Improved: Warded portal alerts you or a creature designated by you to creatures passing through it. Ray Deﬂection: Ray attacks are reﬂected away. Ray of Deanimation: Ray deals 1d6 damage/level to constructs.  265  Illus. by J. Nelson  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  266  Resistance, Greater: Subject gains +3 on saving throws. Resist Energy, Mass: Creatures ignore damage from speciﬁed energy type. Wall of Chaos/Evil/Good/LawM: Wall blocks creatures of opposite alignment. Conj Blast of Flame: 60-ft. cone of ﬁre (1d6/level damage). Bloodstar F: Hovering construct does Con damage each time foe is damaged. Ethereal Mount: You conjure swift mounts on the Ethereal Plane. Orb of Acid: Ranged touch, 1d6/level acid damage and subject might be sickened. Orb of Cold: Ranged touch, 1d6/level cold damage and subject might be blinded. Orb of Electricity: Ranged touch, 1d6/level electricity damage and subject might be entangled. Orb of Fire: Ranged touch, 1d6/level ﬁre damage and subject might be dazed. Orb of Force: Globe of force deals 1d6/level damage (max 10d6). Orb of Sound: Ranged touch, 1d4/level sonic damage and subject might be deafened. Summon Undead IV: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Translocation Trick: You and subject switch places and appear as each other. Wall of Sand: Swirling sand blocks ranged attacks, slows movement through. Wall of Water: Creates shapeable transparent wall of water. Assay Spell Resistance: +10 bonus on caster level Div checks to defeat one creature’s spell resistance. Know Vulnerabilities: Determine subject’s vulnerabilities and resistances. Treasure Scent: You detect valuable metals and gems. Ench Battle Hymn: Allies can reroll one Will save/ round. Rebuke, Greater: Subject cowers for 1d4 rounds. Evoc Blistering Radiance: Light dazzles creatures, deals 2d6 ﬁre damage in 50-ft.-radius spread. Defenestrating SphereF: Cloudy gray sphere knocks enemies prone, hurls them upward for subsequent falling damage. Dragon Breath: You choose a dragon type and mimic its breath weapon. Energy Spheres: Five colored spheres attack with or negate acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic energy. Explosive Cascade: Bouncing ﬂame ball deals 1d6/level ﬁre damage. Floating Disk, Greater: As ﬂoating disk, but you can ride it. Force Chest: 2-ft-cube chest made of force. Force Claw: Claw of force guards an area, making opportunity attacks. Force Missiles: Unerring missiles of force strike for 2d6 damage and explode in a burst. Forcewave: Bull rushes all creatures within 10 ft.  Stone Sphere: 3-ft.-diameter stone sphere rolls over your enemies. Sword of Deception: Blade of energy attacks independently, deals 1d4 damage, penalizes subsequent save. Thunderlance: Lance of force deals 3d6 damage and might dispel force effects. Vortex of Teeth: 3d8 points of damage due to force per round to all creatures in the area. Wingbind: A net of force entangles the subject, causing it to fall from the sky. Illus Sensory Deprivation: All of subject’s senses are blocked. Shadow Well: Subject enters gloomy pocket plane and emerges frightened. Necro Burning Blood: Subject takes 1d8 acid damage plus 1d8 ﬁre damage/round. Rebuking Breath: Your breath weapon rebukes undead. Trans Attune Form: Grant creature temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Backlash: Subject takes damage if it uses spells against another creature. Bite of the Werewolf: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werewolf. Blinding Breath: Your breath weapon blinds subjects.  Wingbind swiftly brings low-ﬂying foes to ground  Abjur Anticold Sphere: Sphere hedges out cold creatures and protects you from cold. Contingent Energy Resistance: Energy damage triggers a resist energy spell. Dispelling Breath: Your breath weapon acts as a targeted dispel magic to all creatures in its area. Duelward: +4 on Spellcraft checks, counterspell as an immediate action. Ironguard, Lesser: Subject becomes immune to nonmagical metal. Indomitability: Subject can’t be reduced below 1 hp. Planar Tolerance: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Reciprocal Gyre: Creature or object takes 1d12 damage/level of spell affecting it (max 25d12). Refusal: Spellcasters and creatures with spell-like abilities are prevented from entering an area. Symbol of Spell Loss: Triggered rune absorbs spells yet to be cast. Wall of Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall becomes subjects of targeted dispel magic.  SPELL LISTS  5TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Zone of Respite: Prevents teleportation and similar effects from functioning in the area. Conj Acid Sheath F: Sheath of acid damages those who attack you, enhances acid spells. Arc of Lightning: Line of electricity arcs between two creatures (1d6/level damage). Call ZelekhutX: A zelekhut performs one duty for you. Dimension Door, Greater: Short-range, multipleuse dimension door. Dragon Ally, Lesser X: Exchange services with a 9 HD dragon. Hidden Lodge: Creates sturdy cottage camouﬂaged to blend into natural surroundings. Phantasmal Thief: Creates an unseen force that steals from others. Summon Undead V: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Viscid Glob: Ranged touch attack hurls 5-ft.diameter glob of glue at subject. Vitriolic Sphere: Potent acid deals 6d6 acid damage plus possible damage in following 2 rounds. Evoc Ball Lightning: Energy ball deals 1d6/level electricity damage. Cacophonic Burst: Noise deals 1d6/level sonic damage to all within area. Cacophonic Shield: Shield 10 ft. from you blocks sounds, deals 1d6 sonic damage +1/level, and deafens creatures passing through. Cyclonic Blast: Deals 1d6 damage/level, knocks down creatures. Fire Shield, Mass: Creatures attacking allies take damage; allies are protected from ﬁre or cold. FirebrandM: One 5-ft. burst/level deals 1d6 ﬁre/ level plus burning for 1 round. Fireburst, Greater: Subjects within 15 ft. take 1d10/level ﬁre damage. Moonbow: Three motes of electricity each deal 1d6/2 levels electricity damage to subjects. Prismatic Ray: Ray of light blinds subject, deals random effect. Shard Storm: Blast deals 3d6 damage to creatures in area. Shroud of Flame: Subject bursts into ﬂames, taking 2d6 ﬁre damage/round. Sonic RumbleF: Cone of sound deals damage. Wall of Limbs: Whirling limbs deal 5d6 damage and grab creatures passing through. Illus Illusory Feast: Subjects become dazed by illusory food. Shadow Form: Gain +4 on Hide, Move Silently, and Escape Artist checks, and concealment; you can move through obstacles if you have ranks in Escape Artist. Shadow Hand: Medium hand blocks opponents or carries items. Shadowfade: Opens a portal to the Plane of Shadow. Necro Death Throes: Your body explodes when you die. Graymantle: Inhibits creature’s ability to heal and regenerate for 1 round/level.  CHAPTER 2  Corporeal Instability: Transform a creature into an amorphous mass. Darkvision, Mass: As darkvision, but affects one/ level subjects. Displacer Form: You change into displacer beast, gain some abilities. Entangling Staff: Quarterstaff can grapple and constrict foes. Fire Stride: Teleport from one ﬁre to another. Flame Whips: Your forelimbs deal 6d6 ﬁre damage. Flight of the Dragon: You grow dragon wings. Iron Bones: Corporeal undead gains +6 natural armor bonus. Metal Melt: Melts metal object without heat. Perinarch: Gain greater control over Limbo’s morphic essence. Raise from the Deep: Creature or sunken ship made buoyant. Repair Critical Damage: Repairs 4d8 damage +1/ level (max +20) to any construct. Ruin Delver’s Fortune: Cast on another creature’s turn and choose one of several beneﬁts. Scramble Portal: You randomize the destination of a magic portal. Sharptooth: One of your natural weapons deals damage as if you were one size larger. Spell Enhancer: Lets you cast another spell in the same round at +2 caster level. Voice of the Dragon: +10 on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate checks; can use one suggestion. Wings of Air, Greater: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability improves by two steps.  267  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Miasma of Entropy: Rot all natural materials in 30-ft. cone-shaped burst. Night’s Caress: Touched foe takes 1d6 points of damage/level plus 1d6+2 Con damage. Spiritwall: Wall of spirit-forms causes panic, deals 1d10 damage if touched, can bestow negative levels if passed through. Wrack: Renders creature helpless with pain. Trans Bite of the Wereboar: You gain the Strength and attacks of a wereboar. Blink, Greater: Controlled blinking between the Material and Ethereal Planes grants defenses for 1 round/level. Breath Weapon Substitution: Your breath weapon deals a different kind of damage than normal. Draconic Might: Gain +5 to Str, Con, Cha; +4 natural armor; immunity to magic sleep and paralysis effects. Draconic Polymorph: As polymorph, but improved. Dragonsight: Gain low-light vision, darkvision, and blindsense. Earth Reaver: Eruption deals 7d6 damage to all in area. Enlarge Person, Greater: Subject remains enlarged for 1 hour/level. Ethereal Breath: Your breath weapon manifests on the Ethereal Plane. Fiendform: Assume form and abilities of ﬁendish creature, demon, or devil. Fly, Mass: One creature/level ﬂies at speed of 60 ft. Gutsnake: 10-ft. tentacle grows from your stomach and attacks your enemies. Lucent Lance: Ambient light forms lance, deals various damage. Nightstalker’s Transformation M: Gain +4 Dex, +3 luck bonus to AC, +5 luck bonus on Ref saves, +3d6 sneak attack, and evasion. Reduce Person, Greater: Subject remains reduced for 10 minutes/level. Spell Matrix, Lesser F: Magical matrix stores a 3rd-level or lower spell to be cast later as quickened spell. Stunning Breath: Your breath weapon also stuns creatures for 1 round. Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple subjects. Vulnerability: Reduces an opponent’s damage reduction. Xorn Movement: Touched creature swims through earth like a xorn.  6TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  268  Abjur Anticipate Teleportation, Greater F: Predict and delay the arrival of creatures teleporting into range by 3 rounds. Aura of Evasion M: All within 10 ft. gain evasion against breath weapons.  Ruby Ray of ReversalF: Ray negates magical or mundane hazards. Seal Portal M: Seal an interplanar portal or gate. Sign of Sealing, Greater M: Magical sigil protects door, chest, or open space, deals 1d6/level damage (max 20d6) if opened. Conj Resistance, Superior: Subject gains +6 on saving throws. Transcribe Symbol: Safely moves an untriggered magical symbol to another location. Tunnel Swallow: Tunnel’s peristaltic convulsions deal 1d6 points of damage/level (max 15d6). Wall of Gears: Creates wall of moving gears that deals 1d6 damage/2 levels to creatures within 10 ft. Probe Thoughts: Read subject’s memories, one Div question/round. Interplanar Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate across planes. Conj Acid Storm M: Deals 1d6/level acid damage (max 15d6) in a 20-ft. radius. Fire Spiders: Swarm of Fine ﬁre elementals deals ﬁre damage in an area. Freezing Fog: Fog slows creatures, obscures vision, hinders movement. GemjumpF: Teleport to the location of a specially prepared gem. Evoc Fires of Purity: Subject bursts into magical ﬂame, becoming a dangerous weapon. Howling Chain F: Chain of force trips and attacks opponents. Ray of Light: Ray blinds subject. Illus Dream Casting: Alter subject’s dreams to produce desired effect. Illusory Pit: Creatures in area are knocked prone while believing they’re falling. Reﬂective Disguise, Mass: Viewers see subjects as their own species and gender. Shadowy Grappler: Illusory force grapples subject. Necro Aura of Terror: You gain an aura of fear, or your frightful presence becomes more effective. Contagion, Mass: As contagion, but 20-ft. radius. Fleshshiver: Subject is stunned for 1 round, takes 1d6/level damage, and is nauseated for 1d4+2 rounds. Ghoul Gauntlet: Convert victim to a ghoul under your control. Imperious Glare: You cause subjects to cower in fear. Incorporeal Nova: Destroy incorporeal undead. Opalescent Glare: Kill creatures with a look, or make them very afraid. Ray of Entropy: Subject takes –4 Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution. Revive Undead M: Restores undeath to undead that was destroyed up to 1 day/level ago. Spectral Touch: Your touch bestows one negative level/round. Trans Bite of the Weretiger: You gain the Strength and attacks of a weretiger.  Illus. by W. England  Abjur Antimagic RayM: Subject loses all magical powers. Dispelling Screen, Greater: Targeted dispel magic on any creatures and unattended items, +20 max on caster level check. Energy Immunity: Subject and equipment gain immunity to damage of speciﬁed energy type. Ghost Trap: Incorporeal creatures turn corporeal. Hide from Dragons: Dragons can’t perceive one subject/2 levels. IronguardF: Subject becomes immune to all metal. Planar Bubble: Create bubble around creature that emulates its native planar environment. Conj Call KolyarutX: A kolyarut performs one duty for you. Dragon AllyX: As lesser dragon ally, but up to 15 HD. Stun Ray: Subject stunned 1d4+1 rounds. Ench Hiss of Sleep: You induce comatose slumber in subjects. Rebuke, Final: As rebuke, except the subject must save or die. Symphonic NightmareM: Discordant noise haunts subject’s sleep. Transﬁx: Humanoids freeze in place until condition you specify is met. Evoc Emerald Flame Fist: Touch attack deals 3d6 + ﬁre damage 1/level (max +20); subject can be engulfed by ﬂame for additional damage. Ice Claw: Claw of ice grapples and deals cold damage. Prismatic Eye: Orb produces individual prismatic rays as touch attacks. Radiant Assault: 1d6 damage/level, victims dazed or dazzled. Submerge Ship: You control ship mentally while it travels underwater. Illus Solipsism: Subject believes it alone exists. Necro Arrow of BoneM: Missile or thrown weapon gains +4 bonus, subject takes 3d6 damage +1/level (max +20) or is slain. Avasculate: Reduce foe to half hp and stun.  SPELL LISTS  7TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELL  Awaken Undead X: Grant sentience to otherwise mindless undead. Barghest’s FeastM: Destroy corpse, potentially preventing its return to life. Energy Ebb: Give subject one negative level/round for 1 round/level. Evil Glare: Paralyze creatures with your glare. Kiss of the VampireM: You gain vampirelike supernatural abilities, but are vulnerable to attacks that harm undead. Sword of Darkness: Blade of negative energy bestows one or more negative levels. Trans Animate Breath: Your breath weapon becomes an elemental. Bite of the Werebear: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werebear. Body of War: You change into warforged titan, gain some abilities. Brilliant Aura: Allies’ weapons become brilliant energy, ignoring armor. Elemental Body: You take on the qualities of a type of elemental.  CHAPTER 2  Univ  Brilliant Blade: Weapon or projectiles shed light, ignore armor. Cloak of the Sea: Gain blur, freedom of movement, and water breathing while in water. Extract Water Elemental: Pulls water from victim, forms water elemental. HardeningM: Increases object’s hardness by 1 point/2 levels. Make Manifest: You cause a creature on a coexistent plane to appear on your plane. Ooze Puppet: You telekinetically control an ooze. Stone Body: Your body becomes living stone. Subvert Planar Essence: Reduces subject’s damage reduction and spell resistance. Imbue Familiar with Spell Ability: You transfer spells and casting ability into your familiar.  Wizards study spells from many sources in preparation for a journey  269  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Energy Transformation FieldMX: Area absorbs magic energy to power a predetermined spell. Glass Strike: Turns subject into glass. Spell Matrix F: Stores up to two spells of 3rd level or lower to be released later. Stone Shape, Greater: Sculpts 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./level of stone into any shape. Synostodweomer: Channel a spell into positive energy to cure 1d8/spell level.  270  8TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Spell EngineMX: Wizard only. Swap out prepared spells for other spells in your spellbook. Wall of Greater Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall become subjects of targeted greater dispel magic. Conj Fierce Pride of the Beastlands: Summon celestial lions and celestial dire lions to follow your commands. Plane Shift, Greater: Plane shift accurately to your desired destination. Ench Maddening Whispers: You induce confusion and madness in subjects. Wrathful Castigation: Subject dies or is dazed and –4 on saves for 1 round/level. Evoc Field of Icy RazorsF: Creatures in area take normal and cold damage, might be slowed. Lightning Ring: Ring of lightning gives you resistance to electricity 20, damages adjacent creatures, and emits two lightning bolts per round. Illus Shifting Paths: Illusion hides path, creates false new path. Invisibility, Superior: Subject is invisible to sight, hearing, and scent for 1 minute/level, and can attack. Necro Avascular Mass: Reduce foe to half hp and stun, entangle in 20-ft. radius from victim. Bestow Curse, Greater: As bestow curse, but more severe penalties. Blackﬁre: Subject is engulfed in black ﬂame, takes 1d4 Con damage and becomes nauseated; ﬂames and effects can spread to adjacent living creatures. Heart of StoneFX: Exchange your heart with stone heart to gain damage reduction, resistance to energy for 1 year. Skeletal Guard M: Create one skeleton/level with turn resistance. Veil of Undeath: You gain undead traits. Trans Excavate: Creates a permanent passage in earth and walls. Flensing: Pain and trauma deal 2d6 damage, 1d6 Con damage, 1d6 Cha damage for up to 4 rounds. Ghostform: You assume incorporeal form and gain some incorporeal traits and bonuses. Make Manifest, Mass: As make manifest but affecting all creatures in the area. Stunning Breath, Greater: Your breath weapon also stuns creatures for 2d4 rounds.  9TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Absorption: You absorb spell energy to power spells of your own. Effulgent Epuration: Creates one sphere/level to negate hostile magic. Magic Miasma: Solid fog reduces caster level by –4. Maw of Chaos: Chaotic energy dazes, deals damage, impedes concentration. Reaving Dispel: On a targeted dispel, steal spell power and effects for yourself. Unbinding: Frees everyone in range from spells that constrain or bind. Conj Abyssal Army: Summons demons to ﬁght for you. Black Blade of Disaster: Floating magic weapon disintegrates subjects. Call MarutX: A marut performs one duty for you. Dragon Ally, Greater X: As lesser dragon ally, but up to 21 HD. Heavenly Host: Summons archons to ﬁght for you. Hellish Horde: Summons devils to ﬁght for you. Obedient Avalanche: Snowy avalanche crushes and buries your foes. Sphere of Ultimate Destruction: Featureless black sphere does 2d6/level damage, disintegrates. Summon Elemental Monolith M: Calls powerful elemental creature to ﬁght for you. Vile Death MX: Undead creature gains ﬁendish template. Eye of Power: As arcane eye, but you can cast spells of 3rd level or lower through it. HindsightM: You see into the past. Div Ench Programmed AmnesiaM: Destroy, alter, or replace memories in subject creature. Evoc Instant RefugeMX: Transport to a safe location of your choice. Reality Maelstrom: Hole in reality sends creatures and objects to another plane. Necro Enervating Breath: Your breath weapon also bestows 2d4 negative levels. Plague of Undead M: Animates horde of undead. Trans Awaken ConstructX: Construct gains humanlike sentience. Breath Weapon Admixture: Add a second kind of energy to your breath weapon. Perinarch, Planar: Gain control over a small area of any divinely morphic plane. Replicate Casting: Duplicate observed spell or spell-like ability. Spell Matrix, Greater F: Stores up to three spells of 3rd level or lower to be released later. Transmute Rock to Lava: Transforms one 10-ft. cube with subsequent ﬁre damage and effects. Undermaster M: You gain earth-related spell-like abilities.  Appendix: Domain Spells  The following domains supplement those described in Chapter 11 of the Player’s Handbook. In the lists that follow, a dagger (†) following a spell name signiﬁes a spell described in this book.  6 Wind Walk: You and your allies turn vaporous and travel fast. 7 Cat’s Grace, Mass: As cat’s grace, one subject/level. 8 Blink, Greater†: Controlled blinking between the Material and Ethereal Planes grants defenses for 1 round/level. 9 Time Stop: You act freely for 1d4+1 rounds.  CHARM DOMAIN  Balance Domain Spells  Charm Domain Spells  Granted Power: Once per day, as a free action, you can add your Wisdom modiﬁer to your Armor Class. This bonus lasts for 1 round per cleric level.  1 Make Whole: Repairs an object. 2 Calm Emotions: Calms creatures, negating emotion effects. 3 Clarity of Mind†: +4 bonus on saves against mindaffecting spells and abilities, allows reroll of concealment miss chance. 4 Dismissal: Forces a creature to return to native plane. 5 Sanctuary, Mass†: One creature/level can’t be attacked, and can’t attack. 6 Banishment: Banishes 2 HD/level of extraplanar creatures. 7 Word of Balance†: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or nauseates nonneutral creatures. 8 Protection from SpellsMF: Confers +8 resistance bonus. 9 Weighed in the Balance†: Harms or heals creatures within 30 feet of you.  CAVERN DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain the stonecunning ability (PH 15). If you already have stonecunning, your racial bonus on checks to notice unusual stonework increases to +4.  Cavern Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Detect Secret Doors: Reveals hidden doors within 60 ft. Darkness: 20-ft. radius of supernatural shadow. Meld into Stone: You and your gear merge with stone. Leomund’s Secure Shelter: Creates sturdy cottage. Passwall: Creates passage through wood or stone wall. Find the Path: Shows most direct way to a location. Maw of Stone†: Animates cavern opening or chamber. Earthquake: Intense tremor shakes 5-ft./level radius. Imprisonment: Entombs subject beneath the earth.  CELERITY DOMAIN  Granted Power: Your land speed is faster than the norm for your race by 10 feet. This beneﬁt is lost if you are wearing medium or heavy armor or carrying a medium or heavy load.  Celerity Domain Spells 1 2 3 4  Expeditious Retreat: Your speed increases by 30 ft. Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 minute/level. Blur: Attacks miss subject 20% of the time. Haste: One creature/level moves faster, +1 on attack rolls, AC, and Reﬂex saves. 5 Tree Stride: Step from one tree to another far away.  Granted Power: You can boost your Charisma by 4 points once per day. Activating this power is a free action. The Charisma increase lasts 1 minute.  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 2 Calm Emotions: Calms creatures, negating emotion effects. 3 Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 4 Good Hope: Subjects gain +2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. 5 Charm Monster: Makes monster believe it is your ally. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 8 Demand: As sending, plus you can send suggestion. 9 Dominate Monster: As dominate person, but any creature.  APPENDIX  BALANCE DOMAIN  COLD DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You can turn or destroy ﬁre creatures as a good cleric turns undead. You can also rebuke or command cold creatures as an evil cleric rebukes undead. Use these abilities a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  Cold Domain Spells  1 Chill Touch: One touch/level deals 1d6 damage and possibly 1 Str damage. 2 Chill Metal: Cold metal damages those who touch it. 3 Sleet Storm: Hampers vision and movement. 4 Ice Storm: Hail deals 5d6 damage in cylinder 40 ft. across. 5 Wall of Ice: Ice plane creates wall with 15 hp +1/level, or hemisphere can trap creatures inside. 6 Cone of Cold: 1d6/level cold damage. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. 8 Polar Ray: Ranged touch attack deals 1d6/level cold damage. 9 Obedient Avalanche†: Snowy avalanche crushes and buries your foes.  COMMUNITY DOMAIN  Granted Power: Use calm emotions as a spell-like ability once per day. Gain a +2 bonus on Diplomacy checks.  Community Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6  Bless: Allies gain +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. Status: Monitors condition, position of allies. Prayer: Allies +1 on most rolls, enemies –1 penalty. Tongues: Speak any language. Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses.  271  7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 Mordenkainen’s Magniﬁcent Mansion F: Door leads to extradimensional mansion. 9 Heal, Mass: As heal, but with several subjects.  COMPETITION DOMAIN  APPENDIX  Granted Power (Ex): You gain a +1 bonus on opposed checks you make.  Competition Domain Spells  1 Remove Fear: Suppresses fear or gives +4 on saves against fear for one subject + one per 4 levels. 2 Zeal†: You move through foes to attack the enemy you want. 3 Prayer: Allies +1 bonus on most rolls, enemies –1 penalty. 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Str, and 1 hp/ level. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases, and you gain combat bonuses. 6 Zealot Pact†X: You automatically gain combat bonuses when you attack someone of opposite alignment. 7 Regenerate: Subject’s severed limbs grow back, cures 4d8 damage +1/level (max +35). 8 Moment of Prescience: You gain insight bonus on single attack roll, check, or save. 9 Visage of the Deity, Greater†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish.  COURAGE DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You radiate an aura of courage that grants all allies within 10 feet (including yourself) a +4 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects. This ability functions only while you are conscious.  Courage Domain Spells  1 Remove Fear: Suppresses fear or gives +4 on saves against fear for one subject + one per 4 levels. 2 Aid: +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear, 1d8 temporary hp +1/level (max +10). 3 Cloak of Bravery: You and your allies gain a bonus on saves against fear. 4 Heroism: Gives +2 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. 5 Valiant Fury†: +4 Str, Con; +2 Will saves, extra attack. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Heroism, Greater: Gives +4 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks; immunity to fear; temporary hp. 8 Lion’s Roar†: Deals 1d8 points of damage/2 levels to enemies; allies get +1 on attacks and saves against fear, temporary hp. 9 Cloak of Bravery, Greater†: You and your allies become immune to fear and get +2 bonus on attacks.  CRAFT DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast conjuration (creation) spells at +1 caster level and gain Skill Focus as a bonus feat for one Craft skill of your choice.  272  Craft Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6  Animate Rope: Makes a rope move at your command. Wood Shape: Rearranges wooden objects to suit you. Stone Shape: Sculpts stone into any shape. Minor Creation: Creates one cloth or wood object. Wall of Stone: Creates a stone wall that can be shaped. Fantastic Machine†: Creates a machine to perform a single simple task. 7 Major Creation: As minor creation, plus stone and metal. 8 ForcecageM: Cube or cage of force imprisons all inside. 9 Fantastic Machine, Greater† Creates a machine to perform multiple tasks.  CREATION DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast conjuration (creation) spells at +1 caster level.  Creation Domain Spells  1 Create Water: Creates 2 gallons/level of pure water. 2 Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. 3 Create Food and Water: Feeds three humans (or one horse)/level. 4 Minor Creation: Creates one cloth or wood object. 5 Major Creation: As minor creation, plus stone and metal. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Permanent ImageM: Includes sight, sound, and smell. 8 True Creation†X: As major creation, but permanent. 9 Pavilion of Grandeur†: A feast and a great pavilion are created.  DARKNESS DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Blind-Fight as a bonus feat.  Darkness Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Obscuring Mist: Fog surrounds you. Blindness/Deafness: Makes subject blinded or deafened. Blacklight† Create an area of total darkness. Armor of Darkness†: Shroud grants deﬂection bonus, darkvision, and other effects. Darkbolt†: Multiple bolts deal 2d8 damage and daze creatures. Prying Eyes: 1d4 +1/level ﬂoating eyes scout for you. Nightmare: Sends vision dealing 1d10 damage, fatigue. Power Word Blind: Blinds creature with 200 hp or less. Power Word Kill: Kills one creature with 100 hp or less.  DEATHBOUND DOMAIN  Granted Power: Your limit for creating undead animated with spells increases to three times your caster level instead of the normal two times caster level.  Deathbound Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5  Chill of the Grave†: Ray causes cold damage. Blade of Pain and Fear†: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Fangs of the Vampire King†: Grow vampire fangs. Wither Limb†: Cause enemy’s limbs to wither. Revive Undead†M: Restores undeath to undead that was destroyed up to 1 day/level ago. 6 Awaken Undead†X: Grant sentience to otherwise mindless undead.  7 Avasculate†: Reduce foe to half hp and stun. 8 Avascular Mass†: Reduce foe to half hp and stun, entangle in 20-ft. radius from victim. 9 Wail of the Banshee: Kills one creature/level.  DOMINATION DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Spell Focus (enchantment) as a bonus feat.  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 3 Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 4 Dominate Person: Controls humanoid telepathically. 5 Command, Greater: As command, but affects one subject/ level. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Suggestion, Mass: As suggestion, plus one subject/level. 8 True Domination†: As dominate person, but save at –4. 9 Monstrous Thrall†: As true domination, but permanent and affects any creature.  DRAGON DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add Bluff and Intimidate to your list of cleric class skills.  Dragon Domain Spells  1 Magic Fang: One natural weapon of subject creature gets +1 on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Resist Energy: Ignores 10 (or more) points of damage/ attack from speciﬁed energy type. 3 Magic Fang, Greater: One natural weapon of subject creature gets +1/4 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls (max +5). 4 Voice of the Dragon†: +10 on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate checks; can use one suggestion. 5 True SeeingM: Lets you see all things as they really are. 6 Stoneskin M: Ignore 10 points of damage per attack. 7 Dragon Ally†X: As lesser dragon ally, but up to 15 HD. 8 Suggestion, Mass: As suggestion, plus one subject/level. 9 Dominate Monster: As dominate person, but any creature.  DREAM DOMAIN  Granted Power: You are immune to fear effects.  Dream Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Sleep: Puts 4 HD of creatures into magical slumber. AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. Deep Slumber: Puts 10 HD of creatures to sleep. Phantasmal Killer: Fearsome illusion kills subject or deals 3d6 damage. Nightmare: Sends vision dealing 1d10 damage, fatigue. Dream Sight†: Your spirit can hear and see at a distance for 1 minute/level. Scrying, GreaterF: As scrying, but faster and longer. Power Word Stun: Stuns creature with 150 hp or less. Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  Granted Power: You gain Lightning Reﬂexes as a bonus feat.  Drow Domain Spells  1 Cloak of Dark Power†: Cloak protects subject from effects of sunlight. 2 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: See or hear at a distance for 1 minute/level. 3 Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 5 Spiderform†: Polymorph into drider or Large spider. 6 Dispelling Screen, Greater†: Targeted dispel magic on any creatures and unattended items, +20 max on caster level check. 7 Word of Chaos: Nonchaotic subject is killed, confused, stunned, or deafened. 8 Planar Ally, Greater: As lesser planar ally, but up to 24 HD. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  APPENDIX  Domination Domain Spells  DROW DOMAIN  DWARF DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Great Fortitude as a bonus feat.  Dwarf Domain Spells  1 Magic Weapon: Weapon gains +1 bonus. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. 3 Glyph of WardingM: Inscription harms those who pass it. 4 Magic Weapon, Greater: +1 bonus/4 levels (max +5). 5 Fabricate: Transforms raw material into ﬁnished items. 6 Stone Tell: Talk to natural or worked stone. 7 Dictum: Kills, paralyzes, slows, or deafens nonlawful subjects. 8 Protection from SpellsMF: Confers +8 resistance bonus. 9 Elemental Swarm: Summons multiple elementals.* *Earth spell only.  ELF DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain the Point Blank Shot feat.  Elf Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  True Strike: +20 on your next attack roll. Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 minute/level. Snare: Creates a magic booby trap. Tree Stride: Step from one tree to another far away. Commune with Nature: Learn about terrain for 1 mile/ level. Find the Path: Shows most direct way to a location. Liveoak: Oak becomes treant guardian. Sunburst: Blinds all within 80 ft., deals 6d6 damage. Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures.  ENVY DOMAIN  Granted Powers: Add Bluff to your list of cleric class skills. In addition, you cast spells that damage or drain ability scores or bestow negative levels at +1 caster level.  273  APPENDIX  ENVY DOMAIN SPELLS  Force Domain Spells  FAMILY DOMAIN  GLORY DOMAIN  1 Disguise Self: Changes your appearance. 2 Ray of Enfeeblement: Ray deals 1d6+1/2 levels Str penalty. 3 Touch of Idiocy: Subject takes 1d6-point penalty to Int, Wis, and Cha. 4 Vampiric Touch: Touch deals 1d6/2 levels damage; caster gains damage as hp. 5 Crushing Despair: Subjects take –2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. 6 Magic JarF: Enables possession of another creature. 7 Limited Wish X: Alters reality—within spell limits. 8 Simulacrum MX: Creates partially real double of a creature. 9 Wish X: As limited wish, but with fewer limits.  Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can protect a number of creatures equal to your Charisma modiﬁer (minimum one creature) with a +4 dodge bonus to AC. This ability lasts 1 round per level. An affected creature loses this protection if it moves more than 10 feet from you. You can affect yourself with this ability.  Family Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6  Bless: Allies gain +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. Shield OtherF: You take half of subject’s damage. Helping Hand: Ghostly hand leads subject to you. Imbue with Spell Ability: Transfer spells to subject. Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 Protection from SpellsMF: Confers +8 resistance bonus. 9 Prismatic Sphere: As prismatic wall, but surrounds on all sides.  FATE DOMAIN  Granted Power (Ex): You gain the uncanny dodge ability. If you have another class that gives you uncanny dodge, your cleric levels add to that class’s level for determining when you gain the improved uncanny dodge class feature (PH 26).  Fate Domain Spells  1 True Strike: +20 on your next attack roll. 2 AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. 3 Bestow Curse: –6 to an ability score; –4 on attack rolls, saves, and checks; or 50% chance of losing each action. 4 Status: Monitors condition, position of allies. 5 Mark of Justice: Designates action that will trigger curse on subject. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Vision MX: As legend lore, but quicker and strenuous. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger.  FORCE DOMAIN  274  Granted Power (Su): By manipulating cosmic forces of inertia, once per day you can reroll any damage roll (for a weapon, a spell, or an ability) and take the better of the two rolls.  1 Mage Armor: Gives subject +4 armor bonus. 2 Magic Missile: 1d4+1 damage; +1 missile/2 levels above 1st (max 5). 3 Blast of Force†: Attack deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). 4 Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere: Force globe protects but traps one subject. 5 Wall of Force: Wall is immune to damage. 6 Repulsion: Creatures can’t approach you. 7 ForcecageM: Cube or cage of force imprisons all inside. 8 Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere: As Otiluke’s resilient sphere, but you move sphere telekinetically. 9 Bigby’s Crushing Hand: Large hand provides cover, pushes, or crushes your foes.  Granted Power: Turn undead with a +2 bonus on the turning check and +1d6 on the turning damage roll.  Glory Domain Spells  1 Disrupt Undead: Deals 1d6 damage to one undead. 2 Bless Weapon: Weapon strikes true against evil foes. 3 Searing Light: Ray deals 1d8/2 levels damage, more against undead. 4 Holy Smite: Damages and blinds evil creatures. 5 Holy Sword: Weapon becomes +5, deals +2d6 damage against evil. 6 Bolt of Glory†: Positive energy ray deals extra damage to evil outsiders and undead. 7 Sunbeam: Beam blinds and deals 4d6 damage. 8 Crown of Glory†M: You gain +4 Charisma and inspire your allies. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  GLUTTONY DOMAIN  Granted Power: For a total time per day of 1 round per cleric level you possess, you can increase your size as if you were affected by the enlarge person spell. Activating the power or ending it is a free action.  Gluttony Domain Spells  1 Goodberry: 2d4 berries each cure 1 hp (max 8 hit points/24 hours) 2 Death Knell: Kills dying creature; you gain 1d8 temporary hp, +2 to Str, and +1 caster level. 3 Create Food and Water: Feeds three humans (or one horse)/level. 4 Vampiric Touch: Touch deals 1d6/2 levels damage; caster gains damage as hp. 5 Baleful Polymorph: Transforms subject into harmless animal. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Stone to Flesh: Restores petriﬁed creatures. 8 Bite of the King†: Swallow enemies whole. 9 Trap the SoulMF: Imprisons subject within gem.  GNOME DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast illusion spells at +1 caster level.  Gnome Domain Spells  GREED DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a +2 competence bonus on Appraise, Open Lock, and Sleight of Hand checks.  Greed Domain Spells  1 Cheat†: Caster rerolls when determining the success of a game of chance. 2 Entice Gift† Subject gives caster what it’s holding. 3 Knock: Opens locked or magically sealed door. 4 Fire TrapM: Opened object deals 1d4 damage +1/level. 5 Fabricate: Transforms raw material into ﬁnished items. 6 Guards and Wards: Array of magical effects protects area. 7 Teleport Object: As teleport, but affects a touched object. 8 Phantasmal Thief†: Creates an unseen force that steals from others. 9 SympathyF: Object or location attracts certain creatures.  HALFLING DOMAIN  Granted Power: Once per day for 10 minutes, you add your Charisma modiﬁer to your Climb, Jump, Move Silently, and Hide checks. Activating this ability is a free action.  Halfling Domain Spells  1 Magic Stone: Three stones gain +1 on attack rolls, deal 1d6+1 damage. 2 Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 minute/level. 3 Magic Vestment: Armor or shield gains +1 enhancement/ 4 levels. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound: Phantom dog can attack, guard. 6 Move Earth: Dig trenches and build walls. 7 Shadow Walk: Step into shadow to travel rapidly. 8 Word of Recall: Teleports you back to designated place. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger.  HATRED DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, choose one opponent. Against that foe you gain a +2 profane bonus on attack rolls, saving throws, and Armor Class for 1 minute.  1 Doom: One subject takes –2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. 2 Scare: Panics creatures of less than 6 HD. 3 Bestow Curse: –6 to an ability score; –4 on attack rolls, saves, and checks; or 50% chance of losing each action. 4 Rage: Gives +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases and you gain combat bonuses. 6 ForbiddanceM: Blocks planar travel, damages creatures of different alignment. 7 Blasphemy: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil subject. 8 Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures. 9 Wail of the Banshee: Kills one creature/level.  APPENDIX  1 Silent Image: Creates minor illusion of your design. 2 Gembomb†M: Gem becomes a bomb that deals 1d8 force damage/2 levels. 3 Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. 4 Minor Creation: Creates one cloth or wood object. 5 Hallucinatory Terrain: Makes one type of terrain appear like another (ﬁeld into forest, or the like). 6 Fantastic Machine: Creates a machine to perform a single simple task. 7 Screen: Illusion hides area from vision, scrying. 8 Otto’s Irresistible Dance: Forces subject to dance. 9 Summon Nature’s Ally IX*: Summons creature to ﬁght. *Earth elementals or animals only.  Hatred Domain Spells  HUNGER DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a bite attack. If you are Small, your bite attack deals 1d4 points of damage; Medium, 1d6; or Large, 1d8. You are proﬁcient with your bite, and considered armed. If you already have a natural bite attack, use the higher of the two damage values. This is considered a secondary natural attack.  Hunger Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Ghoul Light†: Light provides turn resistance. Ghoul Glyph†: Glyph wards area, paralyzes victims. Ghoul Gesture†: Ray paralyzes subject. Enervation: Subject gains 1d4 negative levels. Ghoul Gauntlet†: Convert victim to a ghoul under your control. Eyes of the King† Summon ﬁendish dire bats. Field of Ghouls†: Transform dying creatures into ghouls. Bite of the King†: Swallow enemies whole. Energy Drain: Subject gains 2d4 negative levels.  ILLUSION DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast all illusion spells at +1 caster level.  Illusion Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Silent Image: Creates minor illusion of your design. Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. Displacement: Attacks miss subject 50%. Phantasmal Killer: Fearsome illusion kills subject or deals 3d6 damage. Persistent Image: As major image, but no concentration required. Mislead: Turns you invisible and creates illusory double. Project Image: Illusory double can talk and cast spells. Screen: Illusion hides area from vision, scrying. Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  INQUISITION DOMAIN  Granted Power: Gain a +4 bonus on dispel checks.  Inquisition Domain Spells 1 2 3 4  Detect Chaos: Reveals chaotic creatures, spells, or objects. Zone of Truth: Subjects within range cannot lie. Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods.  275  5 True SeeingM: Lets you see all things as they really are. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Dictum: Kills, paralyzes, slows, or deafens nonlawful subjects. 8 Shield of LawF: +4 AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against chaotic spells. 9 Imprisonment: Entombs subject beneath the earth.  APPENDIX  LIBERATION DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): If you are affected by a charm, compulsion, or fear effect and fail your saving throw, you can attempt the save again 1 round later at the same DC. You get only this one extra chance to succeed on your saving throw.  Liberation Domain Spells  1 Omen of Peril†F: You know how dangerous the future will be. 2 Undetectable Alignment: Conceals alignment for 24 hours. 3 Rage: Subjects gain +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 Break Enchantment: Frees subjects from enchantments, alterations, curses, and petriﬁcation. 6 Dispel Magic, Greater: As dispel magic, but up to +20 on check. 7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Unbinding†: Frees everyone in range from spells that constrain or bind.  LUST DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you gain an enhancement bonus to Charisma equal to your cleric level. The power lasts for 1 round.  Lust Domain Spells  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 2 Invisibility: Subject is invisible for 1 minute/level or until it attacks. 3 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: See or hear at a distance for 1 minute/level. 4 Planar Ally, LesserX: Exchange services with a 6 HD extraplanar creature. 5 ScryingF: Spies on subject from a distance. 6 Symbol of Persuasion M: Triggered rune charms nearby creatures. 7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 SympathyF: Object or location attracts certain creatures. 9 Trap the SoulMF: Imprisons subject within gem.  MADNESS DOMAIN  Granted Power: You subtract 1 from all Wisdom-based skill checks and all Will saves. However, once per day, you can see and act with the clarity of true madness: Add one-half your level to a single Wisdom-based skill check or Will save. You must choose to use this beneﬁt before the check or save is rolled.  276  Madness Domain Spells  1 Confusion, Lesser: One creature acts randomly for 1 round. 2 Touch of Madness†: Dazes one creature for 1 round/level. 3 Rage: Subjects gain +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 4 Confusion: Makes subject behave oddly for 1 round/level. 5 Bolts of Bedevilment†: One ray/round, dazes 1d3 rounds. 6 Phantasmal Killer: Fearsome illusion kills subject or deals 3d6 damage. 7 Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 8 Maddening Scream†: Subject has –4 AC, no shield, Reﬂex save on 20 only. 9 Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  MENTALISM DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): Once per day as a standard action, you can generate a mental ward, granting a creature you touch a resistance bonus on its next Will saving throw equal to your level +2. The mental ward is an abjuration effect with a duration of 1 hour.  Mentalism Domain Spells  1 Confusion, Lesser: One creature acts randomly for 1 round. 2 Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. 3 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: See or hear at a distance for 1 minute/level. 4 Modify Memory: Changes 5 minutes of subject’s memories. 5 Mind Fog: Subjects in fog get –10 to Wisdom and Will checks. 6 Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. 7 Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Astral Projection M: Projects you and companions onto the Astral Plane.  METAL DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Martial Weapon Proﬁciency and Weapon Focus as bonus feats for either the light hammer or the warhammer (your choice).  Metal Domain Spells  1 Magic Weapon: Weapon gains +1 bonus. 2 Heat Metal: Make metal so hot it damages those who touch it. 3 Keen Edge: Doubles normal weapon’s threat range. 4 Rusting Grasp: Your touch corrodes iron and alloys. 5 Wall of Iron M: 30 hp/4 levels; can topple onto foes. 6 Blade Barrier: Wall of blades deals 1d6/level damage. 7 Transmute Metal to Wood: Metal within 40 ft. becomes wood. 8 Iron Body: Your body becomes living iron. 9 Repel Metal or Stone: Pushes away metal and stone.  MIND DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a +2 bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Sense Motive checks.  Mind Domain Spells  MOON DOMAIN  Granted Power: Turn or destroy lycanthropes as a good cleric turns or destroys undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  Moon Domain Spells  1 Faerie Fire: Outlines subject with light, canceling blur, concealment, and the like. 2 Moonbeam†: Forces lycanthropes to regain human shape. 3 Moon Blade†: Creates sword that does 2d8 damage +1/two level, scrambles magic. 4 Fear: Subjects within cone ﬂee for 1 round/level. 5 Moon Path†: Creates invisible stair or bridge. 6 Permanent ImageM: Includes sight, sound, and smell. 7 Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 8 Animal Shapes: One ally/level polymorphs into chosen animal. 9 Moonﬁre†: Cone of light damages creatures, reveals hidden things, negates electricity damage.  MYSTICISM DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day, you can use a free action to channel your deity’s power to grant yourself a luck bonus on your saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer (minimum +1). The effect lasts for 1 round per cleric level.  Mysticism Domain Spells  1 Divine Favor: You gain +1/3 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Spiritual Weapon: Magic weapon attacks on its own. 3 Visage of the Deity, Lesser†: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. 4 Weapon of the Deity†: Your weapon gains enhancement bonus and special ability. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases and you gain combat bonuses. 6 Visage of the Deity†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become celestial or ﬁendish. 7 Blasphemy/Holy Word*: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil/non-good subjects. 8 Holy Aura/Unholy AuraF*: +4 AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against evil/good spells. 9 Visage of the Deity, Greater†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish. * Choose good or evil version based on your alignment.  NOBILITY DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): Once per day as a standard action, you can inspire allies, giving them a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, attack rolls and damage rolls, ability checks, and skill checks. Allies must be able to hear you speak for 1 round. This effect lasts for a number of rounds equal to your Charisma bonus (minimum 1 round).  Nobility Domain Spells  1 Divine Favor: You gain +1/3 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 3 Magic Vestment: Armor or shield gains +1 enhancement/4 levels. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 5 Command, Greater: As command, but affects one subject/ level. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Repulsion: Creatures can’t approach you. 8 Demand: As sending, plus you can send suggestion. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  APPENDIX  1 Comprehend Languages: You understand all spoken and written languages. 2 Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. 3 Telepathic Bond, Lesser: Link with subject within 30 ft. for 10 minutes/level. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 5 Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. 6 Probe Thoughts†: Read subject’s memories, one question/ round. 7 Brain Spider†: Eavesdrop on thoughts of up to eight other creatures. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  OCEAN DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You have the supernatural ability to breathe water as if under the effect of a water breathing spell, for up to 1 minute per level. This effect occurs automatically as soon as it applies, lasts until it runs out or is no longer needed, and can operate multiple times per day (up to the total daily time limit).  Ocean Domain Spells  1 Endure Elements: Exist comfortably in hot or cold environments. 2 Sound Burst: Deals 1d8 sonic damage to subjects, might also stun them. 3 Water Breathing: Subjects can breathe underwater. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 Wall of Ice: Ice plane creates wall with 15 hp +1/level, or hemisphere can trap creatures inside. 6 Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere: Freezes water or deals cold damage. 7 Waterspout†: Waterspout you control picks up and damages foes. 8 Maelstrom†: Water vortex traps and damages creatures and objects. 9 Elemental Swarm: Summons multiple elementals.* *Cast as a water spell only.  ORACLE DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast all divination spells at +2 caster level.  Oracle Domain Spells  1 IdentifyM: Determines properties of magic item. 2 AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. 3 Divination M: Provides useful advice for speciﬁc proposed action. 4 ScryingF: Spies on subject from a distance. 5 CommuneX: Deity answers one yes-or-no question/level.  277  6 Legend LoreMF: Lets you learn tales about a person, place, or thing. 7 Scrying, GreaterF: As scrying, but faster and longer. 8 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger.  APPENDIX  ORC DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You gain the smite power, the ability to make a single melee attack with a bonus on the damage roll equal to your cleric level (if you hit). You must declare the smite before making the attack. It is usable once per day. If used against a dwarf or an elf, you get a +4 bonus on the smite attack roll.  Orc Domain Spells  1 Cause Fear: One creature of 5 HD or fewer ﬂees for 1d4 rounds. 2 Produce Flame: 1d6 damage +1/level, touch or thrown. 3 Prayer: Allies +1 on most rolls, enemies –1 penalty. 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Str, and 1 hp/ level. 5 Prying Eyes: 1d4 +1/level ﬂoating eyes scout for you. 6 Eyebite: Subject becomes panicked, sickened, and comatose. 7 Blasphemy: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil subject. 8 Cloak of ChaosF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against lawful spells. 9 Power Word Kill: Kills one creature with 100 hp or less.  PACT DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add Appraise, Intimidate, and Sense Motive to your list of cleric class skills.  Pact Domain Spells  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. 2 Shield OtherF: You take half of subject’s damage. 3 Speak With Dead: Corpse answers one question/2 levels. 4 Divination M: Provides useful advice for speciﬁc proposed action. 5 Stalwart Pact†M: You gain combat bonuses automatically when reduced to half hit points or lower. 6 Zealot Pact†X: You automatically gain combat bonuses when you attack someone of opposite alignment. 7 Renewal Pact†M: Creature is automatically healed if adverse condition affects it. 8 Death Pact†M: Deity brings subject back from the dead automatically. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  PESTILENCE DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain immunity to the effects of all diseases, though you can still carry infectious diseases.  Pestilence Domain Spells  278  1 Doom: One subject takes –2 on attacks, damage, saves, and checks. 2 Summon Swarm: Summons swarm of bats, rats, or spiders. 3 Contagion: Infects subject with chosen disease.  4 Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 5 Plague of Rats† Summons horde of rats. 6 Curse of Lycanthropy†: Kills subject and summons wererats. 7 Scourge†: Inﬂicts a disease that must be magically cured, one subject/level. 8 Horrid Wilting: Deals 1d6/level damage within 30 ft. 9 Otyugh Swarm†: Creates 3d4 otyughs or 1d3+1 Huge otyughs.  PLANNING DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Extend Spell as a bonus feat.  Planning Domain Spells  1 Deathwatch: Reveals how near death subjects within 30 ft. are. 2 AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. 3 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: Hear or see at a distance for 1 minute/level. 4 Status: Monitors condition, position of allies. 5 Detect Scrying: Alerts you of magical eavesdropping. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Scrying, GreaterF: As scrying, but faster and longer. 8 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. 9 Time Stop: You act freely for 1d4+1 rounds.  PORTAL DOMAIN  Granted Power: You can detect an active or inactive portal as if it were a normal secret door (Search DC 20).  Portal Domain Spells  1 Summon Monster I: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 2 Analyze Portal: Find a nearby portal and discover its properties. 3 Dimensional Anchor: Bars extradimensional movement. 4 Dimension Door: Teleports you a short distance. 5 Teleport: Forces a creature to return to native plane. 6 Banishment: Banishes 2 HD/level of extraplanar creatures. 7 Etherealness: Travel to Ethereal Plane with companions. 8 Maze: Traps subject in extradimensional maze. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  PRIDE DOMAIN  Granted Power: Whenever you roll a 1 on a saving throw, you can immediately reroll the save. You must keep the result of the second roll, even if it is another 1.  Pride Domain Spells  1 Hypnotism: Fascinates 2d4 HD of creatures. 2 Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 Cha for 1 minute/level. 3 Heroism: Gives +2 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Str, and 1 hp/ level. 5 Reduce Person, Mass: Reduces several creatures.  6 ForbiddanceM: Blocks planar travel, damages creatures of different alignment. 7 Heroism, Greater: Gives +4 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks; immunity to fear; temporary hp. 8 Spell Immunity, Greater: As spell immunity, but up to 8th-level spells. 9 Charm Monster, Mass: As charm monster, but all within 30 ft.  Granted Power: You cast all abjuration spells at +1 caster level.  Purification Domain Spells  1 Nimbus of Light†: Sunlight illuminates you until released as an attack. 2 Deiﬁc Vengeance†: Deity’s punishment deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). 3 Recitation† Your allies get bonus on AC, attacks and saves. 4 Castigate†: Verbal rebuke damages those whose alignment differs from yours. 5 Dance of the Unicorn†: Purifying mist washes the air clean of smoke, dust, and poisons. 6 Fires of Purity†: Subject bursts into magical ﬂame, becoming a dangerous weapon. 7 Righteous Wrath of the Faithful†: Your allies gain extra attack, +3 on attack rolls and damage rolls. 8 Sunburst†: Blinds all within 80 ft., deals 6d6 damage. 9 Visage of the Deity, Greater†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish.  RENEWAL DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): If you fall below 0 hit points, you regain a number of hit points equal to 1d8 + your Charisma modiﬁer. This ability functions once per day. If an attack brings you to –10 hit points or lower, you die before this power takes effect.  Renewal Domain Spells  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 2 Restoration, Lesser: Dispels magical ability penalty or repairs 1d4 ability damage. 3 Remove Disease: Cures all diseases affecting subject. 4 Reincarnate: Brings dead subject back to life in random body. 5 AtonementFX: Removes burden of misdeeds from subject. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Restoration, GreaterX: As restoration, plus restores all levels and ability scores. 8 Polymorph Any Object: Changes any subject into anything else. 9 Freedom: Releases creature from imprisonment.  RETRIBUTION DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day, if you have been harmed by someone in combat, you can make a strike of vengeance with a melee or ranged weapon against that foe on your next action. If thie strike hits, you deal maximum damage.  1 Shield of Faith: Aura grants +2 or higher deﬂection bonus. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. 3 Speak with Dead: Corpse answers one question/2 levels. 4 Fire Shield: Creatures attacking you take ﬁre damage; you’re protected from heat or cold. 5 Mark of Justice: Designates action that will trigger curse on subject. 6 Banishment: Banishes 2 HD/level of extraplanar creatures. 7 Spell Turning: Reﬂect 1d4+6 spell levels back at caster. 8 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  APPENDIX  PURIFICATION DOMAIN  Retribution Domain Spells  RUNE DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Scribe Scroll as a bonus feat.  Rune Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Erase: Mundane or magical writing vanishes. Secret Page: Changes one page to hide its real content. Glyph of WardingM: Inscription harms those who pass it. Explosive Runes: Deals 6d6 damage when read. Planar Binding, Lesser: Traps extraplanar creature of 6 HD or less until it performs a task. Glyph of Warding, Greater: As glyph of warding, but up to 10d8 damage or 6th-level spell. Drawmij’s Instant SummonsM: Prepared object appears in your hand. Symbol of Death M: Triggered rune slays nearby creatures. Teleportation CircleM: Circle teleports any creature inside to designated spot.  SCALYKIND DOMAIN  Granted Power: Rebuke or command animals (reptilian creatures and snakes only) as an evil cleric rebukes or commands undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  Scalykind Domain Spells  1 Magic Fang: One natural weapon of subject creature gets +1 on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Animal Trance*: Fascinates 2d6 animals. 3 Magic Fang, Greater: One natural attack of subject creature gets +1/4 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls (max +5). 4 Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 5 Animal Growth*: One animal/2 levels doubles in size. 6 Eyebite: Subject becomes panicked, sickened, and comatose. 7 Creeping Doom**: Swarms of centipedes attack at your command. 8 Animal Shapes*: One ally/level polymorphs into chosen animal. 9 ShapechangeF: Transforms you into any creature, and change forms once per round. *Affects only ophidian and reptilian creatures. **Composed of tiny snakes.  279  SLIME DOMAIN  SPIDER DOMAIN  Slime Domain Spells  Spider Domain Spells  APPENDIX  Granted Power: Rebuke or command oozes as an evil cleric rebukes or commands undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  1 Grease: Makes 10-ft. square or one object slippery. 2 Melf’s Acid Arrow: Ranged touch attack; 2d4 damage for 1 round + 1 round/3 levels. 3 Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 4 Rusting Grasp: Your touch corrodes iron and alloys. 5 Evard’s Black Tentacles: Tentacles grapple all within 15ft. spread. 6 Transmute Rock to Mud: Transforms two 10-ft. cubes per level. 7 Destruction F: Kills subject and destroys remains. 8 Power Word Blind: Blinds creature with 200 hp or less. 9 Implosion: Kills one creature/round.  SLOTH DOMAIN  Granted Powers: You are closest to your god while lazing and relaxing. You take no penalty to Armor Class against melee attacks while prone.  Sloth Domain Spells 1 2 3 4  5 6 7 8 9  Touch of Fatigue: Touch attack fatigues subject. Unseen Servant: Invisible force obeys your commands. Deep Slumber: Puts 10 HD of creatures to sleep. Slow: One subject/level takes only one action/round, –2 to AC, –2 on attack rolls. Symbol of SleepM: Triggered rune puts nearby creatures into catatonic slumber. Waves of Fatigue: Several subjects become fatigued. Shadow Walk: Step into shadow to travel rapidly. Waves of Exhaustion: Several subjects become exhausted. Astral Projection M: Projects you and companions onto the Astral Plane.  SPELL DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a +2 bonus on Concentration checks and Spellcraft checks.  Spell Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  280  Mage Armor: Gives subject +4 armor bonus. Silence: Negates sound in 15-ft. radius. Anyspell†: Prepare any arcane spell up to 2nd level. Rary’s Mnemonic EnhancerF: Wizard only. Prepares extra spells or retains one just cast. Break Enchantment: Frees subjects from enchantments, alternations, curses, and petriﬁcation. Anyspell, Greater†: Prepare any arcane spell up to 5th level. Limited Wish X: Alters reality—within spell limits. Antimagic Field: Negates magic within 10 ft. Mordenkainen’s Disjunction: Dispels magic, disenchants magic items.  Granted Power: Rebuke or command spiders as an evil cleric rebukes or commands undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  1 2 3 4  Spider Climb: Grants ability to walk on walls and ceilings. Summon Swarm: Summons swarm of bats, rats, or spiders. Phantom Steed*: Magic horse appears for 1 hour/level. Giant Vermin: Turns centipedes, scorpions, or spiders into giant vermin. 5 Insect Plague: Locust swarms attack creatures. 6 Spider Curse†: Turn humanoid subject into a drider. 7 Stone Spiders†: Transform pebbles into monstrous spider constructs. 8 Creeping Doom: Swarms of centipedes attack at your command. 9 Spider Shapes†: Polymorph one creature/level into monstrous spider. *Has a vermin shape.  STORM DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain resistance to electricity 5.  Storm Domain Spells  1 Entropic Shield: Ranged attacks against you have 20% miss chance. 2 Gust of Wind: Blows away or knocks down smaller creatures. 3 Call Lightning: Calls down lightning bolts (3d6 per bolt) from sky. 4 Sleet Storm: Hampers vision and movement. 5 Ice Storm: Hail deals 5d6 damage in cylinder 40 ft. across. 6 Summon Monster VI*: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. 8 Whirlwind: Cyclone deals damage and can pick up creatures. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  SUFFERING DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): You can use a pain touch once per day. Make a melee touch attack against a living creature, which bestows on that creature a –2 penalty to Strength and Dexterity for 1 minute on a successful attack. This ability does not affect creatures that have immunity to extra damage from critical hits.  Suffering Domain Spells  1 Bane: Enemies take –1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. 3 Bestow Curse: –6 to an ability score; –4 on attack rolls, saves, and checks; or 50% chance of losing each action. 4 Enervation: Subject gains 1d4 negative levels. 5 Feeblemind: Subject’s Int and Cha drop to 1. 6 Harm: Deals 10 points/level damage to subject. 7 Eyebite: Subject becomes panicked, sickened, and comatose.  8 Symbol of Pain M: Triggered rune wracks nearby creatures with pain. 9 Horrid Wilting: Deals 1d6/level damage within 30 ft.  SUMMONER DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast all conjuration (summoning) and conjuration (calling) spells at +2 caster level.  Summoner Domain Spells  TIME DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Improved Initiative as a bonus feat.  Time Domain Spells  1 True Strike: +20 on your next attack roll. 2 Gentle Repose: Preserves one corpse. 3 Haste: One creature/level moves faster, +1 on attack rolls, AC, and Reﬂex saves. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 PermanencyX: Makes certain spells permanent. 6 ContingencyF: Sets trigger condition for another spell. 7 Legend LoreMF: Lets you learn tales about a person, place, or thing. 8 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger. 9 Time Stop: You act freely for 1d4+1 rounds.  TRADE DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): Once per day as a free action, you can use detect thoughts, affecting one subject and lasting a number of minutes equal to your Charisma bonus (minimum 1 minute).  Trade Domain Spells  1 Message: Whispered conversation at a distance. 2 Gembomb†M: Gem becomes a bomb that deals 1d8 force damage/2 levels. 3 Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 to Charisma for 1 minute/level. 4 Sending: Delivers short message anywhere, instantly. 5 Fabricate: Transforms raw material into ﬁnished items. 6 True SeeingM: Lets you see all things as they really are. 7 Mordenkainen’s Magniﬁcent Mansion F: Door leads to extradimensional mansion. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying.  TYRANNY DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add +1 to the save DC of any enchantment (compulsion) spell you cast.  Tyranny Domain Spells  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 3 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 4 Fear: Subjects within cone ﬂee for 1 round/level. 5 Command, Greater: As command, but affects one subject/ level. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Bigby’s Grasping Hand: Hand provides cover, pushes, or grapples. 8 Charm Monster, Mass: As charm monster, but all within 30 ft. 9 Dominate Monster: As dominate person, but any creature.  APPENDIX  1 Summon Monster I: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 2 Summon Monster II: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 3 Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 4 Planar Ally, LesserX: Exchange services with a 6 HD extraplanar creature. 5 Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 6 Planar Ally: As lesser planar ally, but up to 16 HD. 7 Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 8 Planar Ally, Greater: As lesser planar ally, but up to 24 HD. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  9 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object.  UNDEATH DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Extra Turning as a bonus feat.  Undeath Domain Spells  1 Detect Undead: Reveals undead within 60 ft. 2 DesecrateM: Fills area with negative energy, making undead stronger. 3 Animate Dead M: Creates undead skeletons and zombies. 4 Death Ward: Grants immunity to death spells and negative energy effects. 5 Circle of Death M: Kills 1d4/level HD of creatures. 6 Create Undead M: Creates ghouls, ghasts, mummies, or mohrgs. 7 Control Undead: Undead don’t attack you while under your command. 8 Create Greater Undead M: Create shadows, wraiths, specters, or devourers. 9 Energy Drain: Subject gains 2d4 negative levels.  WEALTH DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add Appraise to your list of cleric class skills. You gain Skill Focus (Appraise) as a bonus feat.  Wealth Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5  6 7 8 9  Alarm: Wards an area for 2 hours/level. Obscure Object: Masks object against scrying. Glyph of WardingM: Inscription harms those who pass it. Detect Scrying: Alerts you of magical eavesdropping. Leomund’s Secret ChestF: Hides expensive chest on Ethereal Plane; you retrieve it at will. ForbiddanceM: Blocks planar travel, damages creatures of different alignment. Sequester: Subject is invisible to sight and scrying; renders creature comatose. Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures.  281  WINDSTORM DOMAIN  Granted Power: Inclement weather has less of an effect on you. Rain and snow don’t penalize your Spot and Search checks. You can move through snow-covered and icy terrain at your normal movement. Wind effects, whether natural or magical, affect you as if you were one size category larger.  APPENDIX  Windstorm Domain Spells  1 Obscuring Mist: Fog surrounds you. 2 Binding Winds: Air prevents subject from moving, hinders ranged attacks. 3 Call Lightning: Calls down lightning bolts (3d6 per bolt) from sky. 4 Ice Storm: Hail deals 5d6 damage in cylinder 40 ft. across. 5 Arc of Lightning†: Line of electricity arcs between two creatures (1d6/level damage). 6 Cloudwalkers†: Subjects can ﬂy outdoors at speed of 60 ft. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. 8 Whirlwind: Cyclone deals damage and can pick up creatures. 9 Whirlwind, Greater†: As whirlwind, but larger and more destructive.  WRATH DOMAIN  Granted Power: Once per day, you can subtract a number of points from your Wisdom score equal to or less than your cleric level. For every 2 points you subtract from your Wisdom score, add 1 point and add them to your Strength score. You suffer all the effects of reduced Wisdom, including access to spells and bonus spells, reduction of Will saves, and penalties on Wisdom-based skills. This trade between ability scores lasts for 1 round per cleric level and cannot be ended prematurely.  Wrath Domain Spells  1 Rhino’s Rush†: Next charge deals double damage. 2 Bull’s Strength: Subject gains +4 Str for 1 minute/level. 3 Rage: Subjects gain +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 4 Shout: Deafens all within cone and deals 5d6 sonic damage. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases, and you gain combat bonuses. 6 Song of Discord: Forces subjects to attack each other. 7 Tenser’s Transformation M: You gain combat bonuses. 8 Shout, Greater: Devastating yell deals 10d6 sonic damage; stuns creatures, damages objects. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  PLANAR DOMAINS  282  A planar domain counts as both of a cleric’s domain choices. The granted powers of a planar domain are more potent than those of other domains, and each level offers two spells from which a cleric can choose when preparing spells. Each day, a cleric with access to a planar domain chooses one of the two spells available to prepare in his domain spell slot for each spell level. Unlike other domains, planar domains each have an alignment requirement that must be met by a cleric who wants to access the domain.  A cleric need not select a speciﬁc deity to have access to a planar domain. A cleric who devotes himself to a speciﬁc alignment (LG, NG, CG, LN, CN, LE, NE, or CE) rather than a deity can select a planar domain in place of his two normal domain choices. If the DM wishes, he can make domains speciﬁc to other planes, using these as representative guides.  ABYSS DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be chaotic evil. Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can channel the furious power of the demons. This power grants you a +4 bonus to Strength but also gives you a –2 penalty to Armor Class. The effect lasts for 5 rounds and cannot be ended prematurely. Add Intimidate to your list of cleric class skills.  Abyss Domain Spells  1 Align Weapon: Weapon becomes evil or chaotic. Cause Fear: One creature of 5 HD or fewer ﬂees for 1d4 rounds. 2 Bull’s Strength: Subject gains +4 to Strength for 1 minute/level. Death Knell: Kills dying creature; you gain 1d8 temporary hp, +2 to Strength, and +1 caster level. 3 Babau Slime†: Secrete a body-covering acid that damages foes’ weapons. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Balor Nimbus†: Subject’s ﬂaming body damages foes in grapple. Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 5 Slay Living: Touch attack kills subject. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Bull’s Strength, Mass: As bull’s strength, affects one subject/level. Harm: Deals 10 points/level damage to subject. 7 Destruction F: Kills subject and destroys remains. Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Finger of Death: Kills one subject. Bodak’s Glare†: You slay a creature, which turns into a bodak 24 hours later. 9 Implosion: Kills one creature/round. Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* * Chaotic evil creatures only.  ARBOREA DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be chaotic good. Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can channel the glory of the eladrin to grant yourself a morale bonus on weapon damage rolls and saves against charm and fear effects. This bonus is equal to your Charisma bonus (if any) and lasts for 1 minute. Add Survival to your list of cleric class skills.  Arborea Domain Spells  1 Endure Elements: Exist comfortably in hot or cold environments. Longstrider: Your speed increases by 10 ft. 2 Aid: +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear, 1d8 temporary hp +1/level (max +10).  BAATOR DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be lawful evil. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to see perfectly in darkness of any kind, even that created by a deeper darkness spell. Add Bluff to your list of cleric class skills.  Baator Domain Spells  1 Bane: Enemies take –1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. Disguise Self: Changes your appearance. 2 Darkness: 20-ft. radius of supernatural shadow. Fox’s Cunning: Subject gains +4 to Intelligence for 1 minute/level. 3 Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Deeper Darkness: Object sheds supernatural shadow in 60-ft. radius. Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 5 Spell Resistance: Subject gains SR 12 + level. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Dominate Person: Controls humanoid telepathically. Fox’s Cunning, Mass: As fox’s cunning, but affects one subject/level. 7 Repulsion: Creatures can’t approach you. Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Demand: As sending, plus you can send suggestion. Spell Turning: Reﬂect 1d4+6 spell levels back at caster. 9 Imprisonment: Entombs subject beneath the earth.  Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* * Lawful evil creatures only.  CELESTIA DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be lawful good. Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can generate an aura of menace similar to that of the archons. The aura lasts for 1 minute. Any hostile enemy within a 20-foot radius of you must succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 your cleric level + your Cha modiﬁer) to resist its effects. Those who fail take a –2 penalty on attack rolls, Armor Class, and saves for 24 hours or until they successfully hit you. A creature that has resisted or broken the effect cannot be affected again by your aura for 24 hours. Add Sense Motive to your list of cleric class skills.  APPENDIX  Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 to Charisma for 1 minute/level. 3 Heroism: Gives +2 on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Neutralize Poison: Immunizes subject against poison, detoxiﬁes venom in or on subject. Opalescent Glare†: Kill creatures with a look, or make them very afraid. 5 Break Enchantment: Frees subjects from enchantments, alternations, curses, and petriﬁcation. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. Eagle’s Splendor, Mass: As eagle’s splendor, affects one subject/level. 7 Spell Turning: Reﬂect 1d4+6 spell levels back at caster. Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Heroism, Greater: Gives +4 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks; immunity to fear; temporary hp. Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Freedom: Releases creature from imprisonment. Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you* * Chaotic good creatures only.  Celestia Domain Spells  1 Light of Lunia†: You radiate silvery light, which you can expend as two bolts that deal 1d6 damage. Shield of Faith: Aura grants +2 or higher deﬂection bonus. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. Shield OtherF: You take half of subject’s damage. 3 Magic Vestment: Armor or shield gains +1 enhancement/4 levels. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Strength, and 1 hp/level. Magic Weapon, Greater: +1 bonus/4 levels (max +5). 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases, and you gain combat bonuses. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Blade Barrier: Wall of blades deals 1d6/level damage. Bear’s Endurance, Mass: As bear’s endurance, affects one subject/level. 7 Regenerate: Subject’s severed limbs grow back, cures 4d8 damage +1/level (max +35). Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Power Word Stun: Stuns creatures with 150 or fewer hp. Shield of LawF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against chaotic spells. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger. Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* * Lawful good creatures only.  ELYSIUM DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be neutral good. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to smite evil with a single melee attack once per day. You add your Charisma bonus (if any) to your attack roll and deal an extra 1 point of damage per class level. This smite attack is treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. At 5th level and every ﬁve levels thereafter, you can use this smite attack one additional time per day.

Magic Item Compendium: YOU CHANGED MY MAGIC ITEMS!  Yes, we did. Chances are, if your character owns a magic item that doesn’t appear in the Dungeon Master’s Guide, something about that item—its price, activation, effect, or even its body slot—is different here from when it was originally published. We didn’t change these items on a whim—the revisions here are designed to create a better overall game experience. If you own a magic item that underwent a drastic price  4  change, work with your DM to find an equitable solution. Maybe the wizard who crafted it for you offers a rebate (or an extra item) to make up the difference for an overpayment, or perhaps the DM just promises to make it up to you with some extra treasure in the next few encounters. And if you underpaid for an item, well, consider yourself lucky . . . but don’t be surprised if the next couple of encounters provide a little less gold than you’d expect!     620_10762_Chp0.indd 4  12/21/06 5:16:35 AM  Illus. by C. Lukacs  or the average adventurer, a suit of magic armor is the Table 1–2: Darkwood Shields Armor first and most important defense against enemies. Not Type Check Penalty Weight much can compare with the effectiveness of a magically Light — 2-1/2 lb. enhanced coat of tough leather, steel rings, or sturdy plates. Heavy — 5 lb. But the potential protection of a suit of armor or shield doesn’t stop with its enhancement bonus. This chapter collects dozens Table 1–3: Dragonhide Armor of magical properties applicable to armor and shields, along with Type Cost many specific suits of armor and shields constructed with a parShield, light 318 gp ticular array of useful properties. Shield, heavy 340 gp  “My armor? +3 adamantine light fortification full plate. I wouldn’t leave home without it.” —Tordek Special Materials: Five percent of armor or shields are made of special materials, such as adamantine, darkwood, dragonhide, or mithral. Tables 1–1 through 1–4 summarize the effects of the most common special materials used in armor and shields; see Special Materials, DMG 283, for more details. All adamantine, darkwood, dragonhide, and mithral items are automatically of masterwork quality, and the costs in Tables 1–1 through 1–4 include masterwork costs.  Table 1–1: Adamantine Armor Type Light Medium Heavy  620_10762_Chp1.indd 5  DR 1/— 2/— 3/—  Cost Modifier +5,000 gp +10,000 gp +15,000 gp  Breastplate Banded mail Half-plate Full plate  Cost 203 gp 257 gp  700 gp 800 gp 1,500 gp 3,300 gp  Hardness and Hit Points: Each +1 of enhancement bonus adds 2 to the hardness of a suit of armor or shield, and 10 to its hit points. Only the armor or shield’s actual enhancement bonus to Armor Class applies; special properties with an enhancement bonus equivalent for the purpose of determining market price don’t increase the hardness or hit points of armor or a shield. Armor Subtypes: Some armor or shield entries have a subtype, either “synergy” or “relic,” in brackets following the entry’s name. A synergy item has a prerequisite, typically an existing special property already imbued into the armor to be enhanced. A relic item has special effectiveness for a character devoted to a particular deity. Additional rules for creating and using these items appear in Chapter 6.  5  12/21/06 5:18:29 AM  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Table 1–4: Mithral Armor Arcane Max Armor Spell Dex Check Failure Type Bonus Pen. Chance Weight Cost Chain shirt +6 — 10% 12-1/2 lb. 1,100 gp +4 –2 20% 20 lb. 4,150 gp Chainmail1 –1 15% 15 lb. 4,200 gp Breastplate1 +5 +3 –3 25% 25 lb. 10,500 gp Full plate2 1 Treated as light armor for the purpose of movement, proficiency, and other limitations. 2 Treated as medium armor for the purpose of movement, proficiency, and other limitations.  ACIDIC Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — This item has a slick-looking, greenish sheen, and a light, acrid-smelling mist constantly rises from its surface. A thin film of acid continuously covers the surface of this armor or shield, which is not damaged by this effect. An acidic suit of armor or shield deals 2d4 points of acid damage per full round of contact to each opponent grappling you, and to any object that remains in direct contact with it (except objects you are holding) for that amount of time. However, the acid deals no damage to creatures or objects that remain in contact with it for less than a full round, such as when a creature makes a melee attack against you. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Melf’s acid arrow. Cost to Create: Varies.  AGILITY Price: +500 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This suit of armor appears more streamlined and elegant than others of its type. It has a smoothly worked surface and no spikes or other accoutrements. While wearing armor that has this property, you gain a +1 resistance bonus on Reflex saving throws.  ARMOR PROPERTIES  To add a special property to a shield or suit of armor, the shield or armor must already have at least a +1 enhancement bonus. A single suit of armor or shield cannot have a modified bonus (enhancement bonus plus special ability bonus equivalents) higher than +10, nor can it have a market price (not counting special materials or the price of the masterwork armor or shield itself) of greater than 200,000 gp. For armor or shields that exceed these limits, see Epic Level Handbook. Unless noted otherwise in the property’s Property entry, each special property in this chapter can be added either to a suit of armor or shield. Some properties can be applied only to a particular category, and are so noted. A few properties can be added only to a smaller subset of a category (such as heavy armor); these are indicated in the item’s Property entry. The items in this section are arranged alphabetically.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace, resistance. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  AGILITY, GREATER [SYNERGY] Price: +8,000 gp Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Synergy Prerequisite: Improved agility As agility, except the armor grants a +5 resistance bonus on Reflex saving throws. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  AGILITY, IMPROVED [SYNERGY] Price: +4,000 gp Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Synergy Prerequisite: Agility As agility, except the armor grants a +3 resistance bonus on Reflex saving throws. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  ANCHORING Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Several images of stylized anchors cover this strangely dense-looking armor.  When wearing armor or a shield that has this property, you are difficult to move from your position during a fight. You gain a +5 enhancement bonus on any ability check to resist a bull rush, overrun, or trip attack. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: Varies.  ANCHORING, GREATER [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Synergy Prerequisite: Anchoring A single stylized anchor covers the chest of this hulking armor. This armor functions as anchoring armor, except that it grants a +10 enhancement bonus on ability checks against bull rush, overrun, and trip attacks. Cost to Create: Varies.  APORTER Price: +20,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Standard (mental) Your eyes skip around this aqua-tinged item, as if having difficulty precisely locating it. When it is activated, a suit of armor or shield that has this property transports you and your equipment to any spot within 800 feet that you can visualize or specify, as the dimension door spell.  6  620_10762_Chp1.indd 6  12/21/06 5:18:31 AM  The aporter property functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dimension door. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  AVERTER  When you activate an averter shield, all enemies who can see it must succeed on DC 14 Will saves or be overcome by a powerful aversion to the shield. For the next 3 rounds, affected creatures do not approach within 30 feet of you. This effect is a mindaffecting compulsion ability. The averter property functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, suggestion or aversion (EPH 79). Cost to Create: 6,500 gp, 520 XP, 13 days.  AXEBLOCK Price: +2 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — The surface of this item appears serrated, sporting hundreds of tiny, knifelike edges. An axeblock shield or suit of armor magically turns away slashing weapons, such as axes and most swords. While wearing armor or carrying a shield that has this property, you gain damage reduction 5/ bludgeoning or piercing. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, stoneskin. Cost to Create: Varies.  BALANCE Price: +3,750 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — This elegant armor appears streamlined yet sturdy. Its surface is decorated with precise, perfectly symmetrical, geometric designs.  [SYNERGY] Price: +18,750 gp Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Synergy Prerequisite: Improved balance As the balance property, except the armor grants a +15 competence bonus on Balance checks. Cost to Create: 9,375 gp, 750 XP, 19 days.  BALANCE, IMPROVED [SYNERGY] Price: +11,250 gp Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Synergy Prerequisite: Balance As the balance property, except the armor grants a +10 competence bonus on Balance checks. Cost to Create: 5,625 gp, 450 XP, 12 days.  BANE BLIND Price: +15,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) illusion Activation: Swift (mental) This armor is patterned with muted colors, textures, and shading. On its chestpiece is an image of a beholder with its eyes closed. Originally designed for rangers and bounty hunters, bane blind armor affects a specific type or subtype of creature. Three times per day while wearing this armor, you can render yourself imperceptible to creatures of the designated type or subtype. Such creatures cannot detect your presence using any nonmagical sensory method (including scent, hearing, tremorsense, blindsense, and the like). This effect lasts for 10 rounds or until you attack (as defined for the purpose of the invisibility spell; PH 245). To randomly determine the armor’s designated creature, roll d% and consult the following table. On a result of Humanoid  d% 01–06 07–13 14–16 17–26 27–29 30–32 33–42 43–54 55–60 61–65 66–68 69–71 72–74 75–81 82–83 84–86 87–95 96–100  Creature Type (Subtype) Aberration Animal Construct Dragon Elemental Fey Giant Humanoid Magical beast Monstrous humanoid Ooze Outsider, chaotic Outsider, lawful Outsider, evil Outsider, good Plant Undead Vermin  ARMOR  This finely wrought black shield emanates an aura of barely contained menace.  BALANCE, GREATER  or Outsider, the DM chooses the specific subtype that this armor affects.  CHAPTER 1  Price: +13,000 gp Property: Shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (mental)  While wearing armor that has this property, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Balance checks. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, balancing lorecall (SC 23). Cost to Create: 1,875 gp, 150 XP, 4 days.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, greater invisibility. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  BEASTSKIN Price: +2 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — This armor is lightly patterned with lines resembling fur, scales, and feathers. Its coloration continuously shifts among muted tones of brown, green, and gray. First created by powerful druids, armor that has this property is particularly useful to characters of that class. Whenever you use wild shape, you can expend one additional daily use of that ability to transform your beastskin armor along with you, rather than simply allowing it to merge with your body. When you do so, the armor transforms into a suit of armor of the same type, fitted for your new form. The armor’s weight changes to match your new size (and shape, if you assume a form with a different body shape). If you are proficient with your suit of beastskin armor in your natural form, then you are proficient with the transformed version as well, regardless of what shape you take. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, ironwood. Cost to Create: Varies.  7  620_10762_Chp1.indd 7  12/21/06 5:18:34 AM  What’s scarier than ﬁghting a giant bear? Fighting a giant bear wearing beastskin armor.  620_10762_Chp1.indd 8  12/21/06 5:18:35 AM  BLINKING Price: +15,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Parts of this semitransparent armor seem to fade in and out of existence, there one moment and gone the next.  Price: +1,500 gp Property: Metal armor Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: —  A suit of armor imbued with this property never tarnishes and is immune to acid damage and rusting effects. While wearing blueshine armor, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Hide checks. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft (alchemy) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  BLURRING Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) illusion Activation: Swift (command) This armor appears indistinct, as though its edges were smeared. When you activate this armor, your appearance becomes distorted and hazy, as if you were affected by a blur spell. The blurring property functions three times per day, and the effect lasts for 5 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blur. Cost to Create: Varies.  620_10762_Chp1.indd 9  A light mist surrounds this armor, obscuring its exact details. As blurring armor, except that the effect’s duration is 10 minutes, and you can activate the blurring property any number of times per day. Cost to Create: Varies.  BUOYANT Price: +4,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This bluish metal armor seems oddly light in your hands, with a liquid sheen. This armor is buoyant in water or similar liquids. Armor that has this property does not apply an armor check penalty on your Swim checks. Additionally, it grants you a +2 competence bonus on Swim checks while you wear it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, swim (SC 217). Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  CALLED Price: +2,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) At first glance, this armor or shield looks like any other item of its kind. Closer inspection reveals a small image of a beckoning hand inscribed on its surface. Provided that you and your called armor or shield are on the same plane, you can call it to you by speaking the proper command word, regardless of the intervening distance. If you aren’t wearing armor at the time, a suit of called armor appears on your body, as though you had donned it in the normal fashion. If you are wearing other armor when you speak the command word, the called armor appears in your space or in an adjacent space you designate that is capable of holding it. A called shield appears on the proper arm if you are not already using another shield when you call  COMMANDER Price: +2,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This item looks particularly clean and bright—in fact, it almost seems to shine with its own light. A suit of armor or shield that has this property always appears brilliant and gleaming, even in filthy or squalid conditions, though it doesn’t shed any useful light. Attempts to paint over or obscure its finish do not diminish its brightness. While wearing commander armor or carrying a commander shield, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Diplomacy checks, and each ally within 30 feet of you (not including yourself) gains a +1 morale bonus on Will saves. However, the shiny finish makes you so noticeable that you also take a –5 penalty on Hide checks (in addition to the normal armor check penalty). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, eagle’s splendor. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Illus. by E. Cox  This armor glistens with a blue-black sheen, as if it were covered in oily liquid sapphire.  Price: +2 bonus Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) illusion Synergy Prerequisite: Blurring  ARMOR  BLUESHINE  [SYNERGY]  it, or in your space or a designated adjacent space if you are. If any other creature has worn your called armor or shield since you last wore it, you can no longer call it until you wear it again. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, teleport. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  CHAPTER 1  When you activate armor that has this property, you can “blink” back and forth between the Material Plane and the Ethereal Plane, as if affected by a blink spell. The blinking property functions once per day, and the effect lasts for 1 minute. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blink. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  BLURRING, GREATER  DAYLIGHT Price: +3,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Swift (command) This brightly polished item bears an image of the sun and has a golden tinge. When activated, a suit of armor or a shield that has this property glows with the brilliance of a daylight spell. This effect functions for up to 30 minutes per day, but the duration need not be continuous; you can turn the effect off with a swift action. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, daylight. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  9  12/21/06 5:18:39 AM  DEATH WARD Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Immediate (mental)  Illus. by W. England  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  This black-enameled item has a translucent quality, as through it were not entirely of this world. Small, white images of skulls decorate the armor’s shoulders, like grotesque epaulets.  against breath weapons. Whenever a breath weapon would normally allow you a Reflex saving throw for half damage, you instead take no damage on a successful save. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: Varies.  EASY TRAVEL Price: +1,500 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: —  Armor and shields that have this property are favored by those dedicated to fighting This armor seems to weigh less than the foul art of necromancy. it should. While wearing or using death ward armor or a death ward When wearing armor that has +1 menacing large steel shield, +1 anchoring small wooden shield, shield, you can activate the this property, you can carry up +1 blurring spiked full plate to a medium load as if it were a armor to ignore any death light load (ignoring the maxieffect (including death spells, mum Dexterity bonus, check penalty, magical death effects, and energy drain) DISPLACEMENT and reduced speed normally incurred by or negative energy effect (such as inflict Price: +1 bonus a medium load). These reductions apply spells or chill touch). Property: Armor only to penalties for the load you carry, Caster Level: 5th The death ward property functions once not to any reduction in speed caused by Aura: Faint; (DC 17) illusion per day. the armor itself. Activation: Swift (command) Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and In addition, you can walk for up to 10 Armor, death ward. Cost to Create: Varies. The shoulder pieces of this armor are embossed hours in a day before having to make Conwith tiny arrows pointing outward in opposite stitution checks to avoid taking nonlethal directions. damage (PH 164). DEEPDWELLER Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Price: +12,000 gp When you activate displacement armor, Armor, bear’s endurance. Property: Armor you appear to be standing right next to Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days. Caster Level: 9th your actual location, as if affected by a Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation displacement spell. Activation: — ECTOPLASMIC The displacement property functions once per day, and the effect lasts for 5 FEEDBACK Dull black, the substance of this armor is rounds. Price: +1 bonus flecked with tiny particles and seems to swirl Property: Armor Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and like the depths of the sea. Caster Level: 5th Armor, displacement. Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Cost to Create: Varies. While wearing deepdweller armor, you Activation: — can breathe water and are immune to damage from cold water and from pres- DRAGONDODGER This armor appears translucent. Holy symbols sure in extreme depths. Armor that has Price: +1 bonus of a good-aligned deity decorate the armor, this property does not apply an armor Property: Light armor and they glow with a soft white light when check penalty on your Swim checks, and Caster Level: 9th it is donned. Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation wearing deepdweller armor allows you to Activation: — converse with any water-breathing creaA suit of armor that has this property creture that has a language. Additionally, you ates a backlash of positive energy against can see twice as far underwater as normal This suit of light armor has a particularly hard incorporeal attackers. Any time you are (see DMG 93 for details on underwater and shiny finish. The protective glyphs that hit by an incorporeal touch attack while effects and dangers). ring its collar and waist glow briefly when wearing it, the armor deals 1d6 points it is donned. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and of damage to the attacker (with no miss Armor, darkvision, water breathing. chance for incorporealness). When wearing armor that has this propCost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and erty, you gain the evasion ability (see Armor, ectoplasmic feedback (SC 78). the monk class feature, PH 41), but only Cost to Create: Varies.  10  620_10762_Chp1.indd 10  12/21/06 5:18:41 AM  ECTOPLASMIC WALL Price: +2 bonus Property: Shield Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Standard (command)  ENERGY DEFENSE [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Immediate (command) Synergy Prerequisite: Energy resistance, improved energy resistance, or greater energy resistance This item bears a stylized elemental motif. However, its flanges and spikes indicate that it has some offensive capability as well. This armor continues to give you the benefit of its prerequisite property. In addition, while wearing or using this kind of armor or shield, you can wreathe it in the type of energy specified by its energy resistance. While this effect is active, any creature that strikes you with a natural weapon, unarmed attack, or nonreach  ENERGY IMMUNITY  FREEDOM  Price: +2 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental)  Price: +5 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: —  This item is decorated with elemental motifs. No particular element is favored in the design; waves, flames, rock formations, and billows of wind are all represented equally in bright enamel.  This armor exudes a slick of fine oil, giving it a scintillating sheen and a pungent scent.  Upon activating armor or a shield that has this property, you gain immunity to damage from one energy type of your choice (acid, cold, electricity, or fire). Each type of energy immunity produces a corresponding minor effect that does not alter the item’s function. For example, you feel a rush of warmth if the armor or shield is protecting you against cold damage, or a chill wind if it is protecting you against fire. A metallic tang fills your mouth and nostrils if electricity protection is in force, and an acrid tang pervades the air around you if acid protection has been activated. The energy immunity property functions once per day. The effect lasts for 1 minute or until you dismiss it (a swift action). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, protection from energy. Cost to Create: Varies.  FEARSOME Price: +15,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) This item is dark in color, and anyone viewing it sees fleeting, grotesque images on its surface. When you activate armor or a shield that has this property, you create an aura of terror in a 20-foot radius around yourself. Every creature in this area briefly perceives a creature from its worst night-  ARMOR  When you activate a shield that has this property and drop it at your feet, a wall of ectoplasm comes into being, as though created by the wall of ectoplasm psionic power. The wall has an area of up to ten 10-foot squares or forms a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 10 feet. The shield is the point of origin for the effect. Once created, the wall is stationary. The wall of ectoplasm is 2 inches thick and has 20 hit points and hardness 5. The Strength check DC to break through the wall is 19. The wall can be dispelled, but checks to dispel it are made with a –4 penalty. Spells, powers, and most effects can’t pass through the opaque wall, nor can ethereal creatures, but it doesn’t block teleportation. The ectoplasmic wall property functions once per day; the effect lasts for 7 rounds or until you pick up the shield. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, wall of iron or wall of ectoplasm (EPH 140). Cost to Create: Varies.  mare instead of you, becoming panicked for 1 round. On a successful DC 16 Will save, the creature is shaken for 1 round instead. The fearsome property functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fear. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  CHAPTER 1  Composed of a substance so pale as to be transparent, this shield has four protrusions around the rim that hold it off the ground even when it is laid face down.  manufactured melee weapon deals normal damage but also takes 1d6+10 points of energy damage of the specified type. The energy defense property functions three times per day. The effect lasts for 5 rounds or until you dismiss it (a swift action). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fire shield, resist energy. Cost to Create: Varies.  While wearing armor that has this property, you move and attack normally, even under circumstances that impede movement, as if affected by a freedom of movement spell. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, freedom of movement. Cost to Create: Varies.  GHOST WARD Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — This item appears normal at first glance, but closer examination reveals the image of a ghostly face on its surface. A suit of armor or shield that has this property allows you to add its enhancement bonus (but not its armor or shield bonus) to your Armor Class against touch attacks (including incorporeal touch attacks). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, mage armor. Cost to Create: Varies.  GILLED Price: +6,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — A decorative fluted border surrounds the neck of this scale-etched armor. A water-breathing wearer of gilled armor can breathe and speak freely in air.  11  620_10762_Chp1.indd 11  12/21/06 5:18:44 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, air breathing (SC 8). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  HAMMERBLOCK  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Price: +2 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — The surface of this item is covered with a pattern of tiny indentations. A hammerblock shield or suit of armor magically turns away bludgeoning weapons, such as maces and clubs. While wearing armor or carrying a shield that has this property, you gain damage reduction 5/piercing or slashing. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, stoneskin. Cost to Create: Varies.  HEALING Price: +8,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) and —; see text This armor has a faint golden sheen, and its surface is embossed with healing runes. On its breastplate is a depiction of an open eye. When activated, armor that has this property heals you of 2d8+5 points of damage. If your hit points are reduced to –1 to –9, this effect occurs automatically, without requiring any action. The healing property functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cure moderate wounds. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  HEALING, GREATER [SYNERGY] Price: +24,000 gp Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) conjuration Synergy Prerequisite: Healing As healing armor, except that greater healing armor heals you of 3d8+15 points of damage. The greater healing property functions twice per day.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cure serious wounds. Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  HEARTENING Price: +2,000 gp Property: Shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: Immediate (mental) This sturdy shield is reinforced with plates and rivets but is no heavier than normal. When activated, a heartening shield grants you 5 temporary hit points, which last up to 5 minutes. These temporary hit points don’t stack with temporary hit points from any other source. The heartening property functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, false life. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 1 day.  LANDING Price: +4,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Although rotund in form, this silvery armor is no more encumbering than usual for its type. A suit of armor that has this property allows you to ignore any damage dealt by the first 60 feet of a fall. Regardless of how far you fall, you can always land on your feet if you so choose. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, feather fall. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  LINKED Price: +6,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: Standard (mental) You sense this item’s inner power more with your mind than your sight. When you activate a suit of armor or a shield that has this property, you can form a telepathic bond with any or all known wearers of other linked items within 10 miles. Wearers can communicate telepathically through the bond even if they  do not share a language. No special effect or influence is established as a result of the bond. The linked property functions three times per day, and the effect lasts for 1 hour. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Rary’s telepathic bond or mindlink (EPH 120) Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  MAGIC-EATING Price: +10,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 16th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) abjuration Activation: — Spirals and reliefs of fanged mouths cover this dull-colored armor. While wearing magic-eating armor, whenever you succeed on a saving throw against a spell that targets you, the armor heals you of 1 point of damage per level of the spell. This healing occurs after the spell takes effect. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, spell resistance. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  MANIFESTER Price: +6,000 gp Property: Shield Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Free (mental) Faintly glowing with inner power, this shield seems to invigorate you. While using a shield that has this property, you can draw 3 power points from it to manifest a psionic power. You must use all these points on the same power, which cannot use power points from any other source. The manifester property functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, any 2nd-level psionic power. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  MASKING Price: +40,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: —  12  620_10762_Chp1.indd 12  12/21/06 5:18:46 AM  Tendrils of dense black smoke stream from every opening in this dark armor, obscuring all detail.  Price: +30,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: Standard (command) The realistic visage of a heavily scarred, horned demon covers much of this armor. Seemingly crafted from fiendish flesh, the armor seems merely grisly . . . until it twitches. When you activate menacing armor, you become frightening. Any one creature (your choice) within 30 feet and with fewer HD than you must make a successful Will saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 your HD + your Cha modifier) or be panicked for 5 rounds. A creature that succeeds on the saving throw is shaken for 1 round instead, and is immune to further uses of this property from the same suit of armor for 24 hours. The menacing property functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fear. Cost to Create: 15,000 gp, 1,200 XP, 30 days.  MINDARMOR Price: +3,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Immediate (mental) Constructed of seamless and tightly bound layers, this item steadies your thoughts when worn. When activated, a suit of armor or a shield that has this property grants you a +5 bonus on Will saves to resist mind-  Price: +1 bonus Property: Light armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This suit of light armor seems exceptionally slick and supple. An abstract tracery in a silvery metal decorates the limbs and torso. While wearing a suit of light armor that has this property, you gain the benefit of the Mobility feat, even if you do not meet its prerequisite. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: Varies.  NIMBLENESS Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — This suit of armor looks much less restrictive than others of its type. A suit of armor that has this property has a maximum Dexterity bonus 1 higher than normal, and its armor check penalty is reduced by 2. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: Varies.  QUICKNESS Price: +5,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This silvery armor feels light and flexible to the touch. A suit of armor that has this property grants a +5-foot enhancement bonus to your land speed. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, longstrider. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  Price: +4 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: — This armor shimmers with a variety of hues, and it feels slick to the touch. A suit of armor that has this property grants resistance 10 against all energy attacks (acid, cold, electricity, fire, and sonic). When you are the subject of an energy attack, the armor also radiates light for a number of rounds equal to the points of damage absorbed (to a maximum of 10 rounds). This light is sufficient to brightly illuminate a 30-foot-radius area and casts shadowy illumination in a 60foot-radius area. If the armor absorbs more energy damage while it is radiating light, the first effect overlaps (does not stack with) the effect that was already in place. For example, if the armor absorbs 4 points of damage from one attack and another 6 points from an attack 2 rounds later, it radiates light for a total of 8 consecutive rounds (4 –2 + 6). Likewise, if the armor absorbs 10 points from one attack and another 5 points from an attack 2 rounds later, it radiates light for 10 consecutive rounds (because 8 rounds remain from the earlier effect, continuing past the end of the second effect’s 5 rounds). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, resist energy. Cost to Create: Varies.  ARMOR  MENACING  MOBILITY  RADIANT  CHAPTER 1  Masking armor protects you and your gear from divination spells and items (such as crystal balls) as if you were constantly under the effect of a nondetection spell. Whenever a divination spell or effect is attempted against you, the caster must succeed on a DC 25 caster level check or the divination fails. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, nondetection. Cost to Create: 20,000 gp, 1,600 XP, 40 days.  affecting spells and abilities until the start of your next turn. The mindarmor property functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, heroism or empty mind (EPH 99). Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  RANGED Price: +1 bonus Property: Shield (except a tower shields) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This streamlined, gray metallic shield is keenly balanced and features a razor-sharp edge. While using a ranged shield, you can throw it in combat. The thrown shield has a range increment of 30 feet. While in the air, the shield is treated in all ways as a ranged weapon, and it cannot be blocked or grabbed except by those with appropriate feats. Regardless of your size, a ranged buckler or ranged light shield deals 1d6 points of slashing damage, and a ranged heavy shield deals 1d8 points. You add your Strength modifier and the  13  620_10762_Chp1.indd 13  12/21/06 5:18:48 AM  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  shield’s enhancement bonus (but not its effective bonus from this or other special properties) to this base damage. After you have thrown it, a ranged shield flies through the air back to you. It returns just before your next turn (and is therefore ready to use again on that turn). You do not benefit from its shield bonus to AC while it is not in your possession. Catching a ranged shield when it comes back is a free action. If you can’t catch it, or if you have moved since throwing it, the shield drops to the ground in the square from which it was thrown. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, hurl (SC 117) or far hand (EPH 106). Cost to Create: Varies.  RETALIATION Price: +2 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: — The surface of this armor roils with pent-up energy. A suit of armor that has this property strikes back at foes who hit hard in melee. While wearing retaliation armor, each time you take 10 or more points of damage from a single melee attack, the armor deals 1d6 points of damage to the attacker. If a single melee attack drops your hit points below 0, the armor strikes the attacker for 3d6 points of damage. Damage from retaliation armor is treated as magic for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, symbol of pain. Cost to Create: Varies.  ROARING Price: +3 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: — The sculpted visage of a dragon adorns the chestpiece of this gleaming armor. Embellishments in the shapes of claws and draconic wings accent the rest of its intimidating appearance. While you are wearing armor that has this property, you gain some protection from ranged attacks. Whenever you are hit by a nonmagical projectile that would deal  10 or fewer points of damage, you take no damage from that attack. The armor automatically turns back the projectile to strike the creature that fired it. Reroll the damage against the original attacker. While you wear this armor, the embossed dragon head roars whenever battle is imminent, granting you a +4 competence bonus on initiative checks. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, protection from arrows, true seeing. Cost to Create: Varies.  SOULBOUND Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Swift (mental) This looks like a normal item of its kind except for a faint blue sheen. A soulbound shield or suit of armor serves as a receptacle for your essentia, much like a soulmeld does. Every point of essentia invested in the shield or armor increases its enhancement bonus to Armor Class by 1, up to a maximum enhancement bonus of +3. Each soulbound shield or suit of armor has an essentia capacity. The maximum number of essentia points that can be invested in it equals this value or your normal essentia capacity (see Table 2–1: Essentia Capacity, Magic of Incarnum 19), whichever is lower. A soulbound shield or suit of armor has a maximum essentia capacity of 2. Chakra Bind: A soulbound shield or suit of armor grants bonuses when it is bound to a chakra, as described below. These effects function continuously, with no need for activation. See Binding Items to Chakras (MoI 108) for more information. Arms: Binding a soulbound shield to your arms chakra grants you a +4 insight bonus on checks or rolls made to avoid being bull rushed or overrun, or to avoid having the item sundered. Soul: Binding soulbound armor to your soul chakra grants you a +4 insight bonus on saves made against the attacks of creatures whose alignments are opposed to yours in any way. For example, a lawful good character would gain this bonus against the spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural attacks of chaotic or evil creatures, while a neutral good character would gain it only against the attacks of evil creatures. Neutral characters gain no benefit from this chakra bind.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic vestment, essentia pool 2. Cost to Create: Varies.  SOULBOUND, GREATER [SYNERGY] Price: +2 bonus Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) abjuration Synergy Prerequisite: Soulbound This property functions as the soulbound property, except a greater soulbound shield or suit of armor has a maximum essentia capacity of 4, for a maximum enhancement bonus to AC of +5. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic vestment, essentia pool 4.  SPEARBLOCK Price: +2 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — The surface of this item appears rough, being covered with hundreds of tiny points reminiscent of spearheads. A spearblock shield or suit of armor magically turns away piercing weapons, such as spears and arrows. While wearing armor or carrying a shield that has this property, you gain damage reduction 5/bludgeoning or slashing. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, stoneskin. Cost to Create: Varies.  SPEED Price: +6,000 gp Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) This item is decorated with silvery arabesques and seems to vibrate with restless energy. A suit of armor or shield that has this property can quicken your movements. Three times per day, you can command it to produce a haste effect on you (as the haste spell) that lasts for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, haste. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  14  620_10762_Chp1.indd 14  12/21/06 5:18:49 AM  STAMINA Price: +500 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This armor appears sturdier than other armor of its type.  [SYNERGY] Price: +8,000 gp Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Synergy Prerequisite: Improved stamina As stamina, except the armor grants a +5 resistance bonus on Fortitude saving throws. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  STAMINA, IMPROVED [SYNERGY] Price: +4,000 gp Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Synergy Prerequisite: Stamina As stamina, except the armor grants a +3 resistance bonus on Fortitude saving throws. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  STYPTIC Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — This blood-red armor is lined with a chalky substance and has an astringent scent. While wearing armor that has this property, you do not suffer ongoing blood loss for any reason. Regardless of their source, bleeding wounds automatically close. You sustain no further hit point loss and stabilize if you are dying. In addition, you have a 25% chance to be unaffected by any blood-draining attack that depletes Con-  Price: +5 bonus Property: Shield Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) transmutation Activation: Standard (mental) This magnificent platinum shield seems to pulse with an air of invincibility. When you activate a shield that has this property, you can avoid injury by manipulating time. You are invulnerable to all attacks, spells, and powers (both harmful and helpful), beginning immediately after you activate the effect and ending at the end of your next turn. The time buttress property functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, temporal stasis or timeless body (EPH 138). Cost to Create: Varies.  TWILIGHT Price: +1 bonus Property: Armor Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This armor possesses a faint, sunset-colored sheen. Armor that has this property is favored by elves and other characters who mix arcane magic and melee combat. A suit of twilight armor looks translucent and semi-incorporeal when donned, reducing the chance of arcane spell failure by 10%. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: Varies.  VANISHING Price: +3 bonus Property: Armor or shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (mental) This dull gray item appears unremarkable. Indeed, your eye easily strays from it.  ARMOR  STAMINA, GREATER  TIME BUTTRESS  A suit of armor or shield that has this property renders you and all your equipment completely imperceptible to other creatures. When you activate it, you become invisible and inaudible, and you cannot be detected by any nonmagical sensory method (including scent, hearing, tremorsense, blindsense, and the like). Once activated, this effect lasts for 3 minutes or until you attack (as defined for the purpose of the invisibility spell; PH 245). Creatures immune to mind-affecting spells and abilities can perceive you normally. The vanishing property functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, suggestion or cloud mind (EPH 84). Cost to Create: Varies.  CHAPTER 1  While wearing armor that has this property, you gain a +1 resistance bonus on Fortitude saving throws. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bear’s endurance, resistance. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  stitution, such as a vampire’s or stirge’s blood drain ability, or the property of a wounding weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cure critical wounds, Heal 10 ranks. Cost to Create: Varies.  VARIABLE Price: +1 bonus Property: Shield Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) This shield is made up of many smooth, overlapping strips. A variable shield can change its size, becoming a buckler, light shield, heavy shield, or tower shield (sized appropriately for you) upon activation. All the rules for carrying items while using shields apply to the new shield size (see Armor Descriptions, PH 124). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item. Cost to Create: Varies.  WOODWALK Price: +9,000 gp Property: Armor Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) This armor’s surface is etched to look like a tree, with the chest serving as the trunk and lower branches, and the arms as thick boughs. If you have the woodland stride class feature, you can activate woodwalk armor to step into a tree and exit from another, as if affected by the tree stride spell. The woodwalk property functions three times per day, and the effect lasts for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, tree stride. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  15  620_10762_Chp1.indd 15  12/21/06 5:18:51 AM  command word to return the buckler to its normal condition. The wall of force ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, wall of force. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 165 gp for masterwork buckler), 160 XP, 4 days.  SPECIFIC ARMOR AND SHIELDS  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  The following suits of armor and shields are usually constructed with exactly the properties described here. You can increase the enhancement bonus of these armors and shields or add more special properties, just as you would for any other item. The items in this section are arranged alphabetically.  BEARSKIN ARMOR Price (Item Level): 14,350 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 30 lb.  ARMOR OF THE FALLEN LEAVES [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 17,350 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 15 lb.  Shaggy black fur, like that of a great bear, covers this metal breastplate.  Illus. by W. Reynolds  A riot of red, yellow, and orange leaves has been sewn together into a rigid suit of armor resembling a breastplate. This suit of armor functions as a +1 wild breastplate if you are neutral good, lawful neutral, neutral, chaotic neutral, or neutral evil. Because it is nonmetallic, wearing this armor does not violate a druid’s spiritual oaths, though it has the durability of steel. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, once per day you can cause the leaves of the armor to turn brown and scatter on the breeze. During this process, you merge with the fallen leaves and disappear. Though the leaves appear to flutter near the ground, they are actually under your disembodied control. While in this state, you can move and interact with your environment as if you were under the effect of a gaseous form spell. This effect lasts for up to 30 minutes or until you use a standard action to end it. To use the relic power, you must worship Obad-Hai and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. If you sacrifice a 6th-level divine slot (or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD), you can use the relic power two times per day. Lore: The first suit of armor of the fallen leaves was sewn together by Ehlonna and presented as a gift to Obad-Hai (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, baleful polymorph, gust of wind.  Armor of the fallen leaves  Cost to Create: 8,500 gp (plus 350 gp for masterwork breastplate), 680 XP, 17 days.  BARRICADE BUCKLER Price (Item Level): 4,165 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 5 lb. This buckler is set with numerous polished green stones: one at its center, and the rest in concentric rings around it. The center stone is the smallest, with larger stones in each ring toward the buckler’s edge.  While wearing this +1 breastplate, you gain a +2 competence bonus on grapple checks. In addition, the armor has three special properties. Once per day, you can activate the armor to gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Constitution for 9 minutes. Two times per day, you can activate the armor to gain the scent special quality (MM 314) for 5 rounds. Three times per day on command, the armor allows you to sprout a pair of claws. These claws deal 1d6 points of damage each (assuming you are Medium) and extend your natural reach by 5 feet. You can attack with both claws as though they were primary natural weapons. Alternatively, you can use a single claw to make an attack as a natural secondary weapon (–5 on the attack roll, no effect on your other attacks). These claws last for 5 rounds. The special properties of a suit of bearskin armor function normally while you are in wild shape (although it does not grant its armor bonus to AC). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bear’s endurance, wild shape. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp (plus 350 gp for masterwork breastplate), 560 XP, 14 days.  By speaking the command word, you can transform this +1 buckler into a 5-foot-by-5foot vertical wall of force. The wall persists for 1 minute or until you speak a second  16  620_10762_Chp1.indd 16  12/21/06 5:18:53 AM  DRAGONRIDER ARMOR EARTHPLATE ARMOR  ELECTRIC EEL HIDE Price (Item Level): 14,165 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 25 lb.  This armor seems to be made from old, worn dragon scales, which give it a pleasantly rustic look.  At first glance, this suit of full plate looks filthy and ill kept. On closer examination, you can see it is expertly crafted, and what appears to be dirt is actually the color of the metal itself. A black crystal shard is set horizontally into the front of the armor across the abdomen. Runes in the Gnome language mark its greaves and gauntlets, and the aroma of fresh earth seems to emanate from the suit.  This armor is made from the rubbery black hide of some finely scaled fish or eel and is slick with a thin slime.  Barricade buckler  620_10762_Chp1.indd 17  A suit of earthplate armor functions as +1 full plate. Once per day while wearing this armor, you can activate a stoneskin effect, as the stoneskin spell. As long as this effect is active, you also gain tremorsense out to 5 feet (MM 316). Both effects last for 90 minutes or until the stoneskin effect absorbs 90 points of damage, whichever comes first. Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Magic Arms and Armor, planar binding, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 20,000 gp (plus 1,650 gp for masterwork full plate), 1,600 XP, 40 days.  Dragonrider armor  When you activate this suit of +1 buoyant slick hide, it generates an electricity shield that lasts 5 rounds. Any creature that strikes you with a natural weapon, unarmed attack, or nonreach manufactured weapon takes 1d6 points of electricity damage. This shield can be activated three times per day. In addition, while the electricity shield is active, you can make a melee touch attack to deal 5d6 points of electricity damage. If underwater, you can produce a lightning burst that deals 2d6 points of electricity damage to all other adjacent creatures. Using either of these abilities ends the electricity shield effect. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, freedom of movement, grease, shocking grasp. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp (plus 165 gp for masterwork hide), 560 XP, 14 days.  Electric eel hide  Illus. by D. Grifﬁth  This suit of +1 dragonhide full plate is made from cast-off scales rather than the hide of a slain dragon. While wearing it, you have resistance 10 against the form of energy associated with the breath weapon of the dragon that provided the scales (such as fire, in the case of red dragonrider armor). You also gain a +5 competence bonus on Ride checks you make while riding any creature of the dragon type. In addition, dragonrider armor automatically produces a feather fall effect (as the feather fall spell) if you fall more than 5 feet while wearing it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp (plus 3,300 gp for dragonhide full plate), 600 XP, 15 days.  ARMOR  Price (Item Level): 41,650 gp (17th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 70 lb.  CHAPTER 1  Price (Item Level): 18,300 gp (15th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 50 lb.  17  12/21/06 5:18:57 AM  Illus. by W. England  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Zombie hide armor  EXOSKELETON ARMOR  Exoskeleton armor  Ghoul shell armor  FOXHIDE ARMOR  Price (Item Level): 21,350 gp (15th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 30 lb.  Price (Item Level): 10,160 gp (13th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 15 lb.  Prepared from the remains of an animated skeleton, this armor covers the upper body with a white, riblike structure that resembles bleached bones. Large skulls serve as epaulets.  This subtly crafted leather armor seems to have been formed from the hide of a single large fox, patches of red fur adorning many of the armor’s curves and ridges.  A suit of exoskeleton armor provides protection as a +1 breastplate and grants you damage reduction 5/bludgeoning while you wear it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate dead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 10,500 gp (plus 350 gp for masterwork breastplate), 840 XP, 21 days.  While wearing this suit of +1 leather, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. In addition, the armor has three other special properties. Once per day, you can activate the armor to gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Intelligence for 9 minutes. Two times per day, you can activate the armor to gain the scent special quality (MM 314) for 5 rounds. Three times per day, you can activate the armor to gain the benefit of a pass without trace spell. While this effect is active, you can move through undergrowth at your  Vampire hide armor  normal speed without taking damage or suffering any other impairment (as the druid’s woodland stride class feature). This effect lasts for 1 hour. The special properties of a suit of foxhide armor function normally while you are in wild shape (although it does not grant its armor bonus to AC). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fox’s cunning, pass without trace, wild shape. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp (plus 160 gp for masterwork leather), 400 XP, 10 days.  GHOUL SHELL ARMOR Price (Item Level): 10,160 gp (13th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 15 lb. This armor consists of shaped and fitted sections of ghoul flesh sewn together to cover the entire body, except for the head, hands, and feet. A gaunt face is emblazoned on the chestpiece.  18  620_10762_Chp1.indd 18  12/21/06 5:19:02 AM  This suit of +1 leather allows you to make up to three touch attacks per day that replicate the ghoul touch spell (Fort DC 15 negates). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, create undead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp (plus 160 gp for masterwork leather), 400 XP, 10 days.  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  HAWKFEATHER ARMOR Price (Item Level): 12,175 gp (13th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 20 lb. This suit of armor is covered by a layer of gigantic golden feathers that seem to shimmer in even the dimmest light. Three times per day, you can cause the armor to sprout wings, allowing you to fly at a speed of 60 feet (good maneuverability) for 5 rounds. The special properties of a suit of hawkfeather armor function normally while you are in wild shape (although it does not grant its armor bonus to AC). This armor includes no metal parts, and thus druids are not prohibited from wearing it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, eagle’s splendor, wild shape. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 175 gp for masterwork studded leather), 480 XP, 12 days.  your choice. The chain deals 1d6 points of bludgeoning damage (no Str bonus on damage), and is treated as a magic weapon with an enhancement bonus equal to the armor’s enhancement bonus to AC. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate objects. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 1,100 gp for mithral shirt), 480 XP, 12 days.  Illus. by S. Belledin & D. Grifﬁth  While wearing this +1 studded leather armor, you gain a continuous +5 competence bonus on Spot checks. In addition, the armor has two other special abilities. Once per day, you can activate the armor to gain a +4 enhancement bonus to your Charisma for 9 minutes.  KYTON ARMOR Price (Item Level): 13,100 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 12 lb. This armor of black chain links has obviously seen heavy use: Five long lengths of chain, to which nasty-looking barbs and small blades are affixed, have unraveled and now dangle free from the bottom of the chest piece.  Foxhide armor  This suit of armor functions as a +1 mithral shirt. When you activate it, one of the five dangling chains makes one melee attack (using your base attack bonus) against an adjacent creature of  Kyton armor  19  620_10762_Chp1.indd 19  12/21/06 5:19:08 AM  as you concentrate, up to a maximum of 10 rounds. Because you must keep your shield arm raised while the wall of force is active, you gain no benefit to AC from this shield for the duration of the effect. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, wall of force. Cost to Create: 12,000 gp (plus 170 gp for masterwork heavy steel shield), 960 XP, 24 days.  MILLENNIAL CHAINMAIL [RELIC]  Illus. by D. Grifﬁth  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Price (Item Level): 8,150 gp (12th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 20 lb. This suit of armor feels like mithral chainmail to the touch, but its minuscule rings are a pale green color that turn brighter when exposed to the sun. If you are chaotic good, chaotic neutral, or neutral good, millennial chainmail functions as +1 mithral chainmail while you wear it. It is considered light armor and has a maximum Dexterity bonus of +8, an armor check penalty of –2, and an arcane spell failure chance of 15%. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a suit of millennial chainmail painlessly extends tiny green roots into your skin when you don it. This effect grants you fast healing 3 as long as you are in brighter than shadowy illumination. To use the relic power, you must worship Corellon Larethian and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. Lore: The original suit of millennial chainmail was created by a dryad cleric for her lover, an elf hero who kept the surrounding woodlands safe. Upon the elf’s death, the armor was consecrated to Corellon Larethian, who duplicated it for several of his chosen heroes (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, regenerate. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 4,150 gp for mithral chainmail), 160 XP, 4 days.  MITHRALMIST SHIRT Price (Item Level): 3,400 gp (8th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 10 lb. This delicate-looking chain shirt is forged from a silver-white mithral alloy that gleams like starlight. Up to seven times per day, you can activate this +1 mithral shirt to fill your space with a billowing silver mist. This gleaming fog grants you concealment against attacks  OWLFEATHER ARMOR Price (Item Level): 8,160 gp (12th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 15 lb. A layer of white down and long gray owl feathers covers this strange leather armor. Affixed to the matching helm are a pair of sweeping, feathery horns.  Millennial chainmail  but does not interfere with your vision. The mist lasts for 1 minute per activation, and it remains in the space where you activated the effect (it doesn’t move with you if you leave that space). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, obscuring mist. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp (plus 1,100 gp for mithral shirt), 92 XP, 3 days.  OVERHEAD SHIELD Price (Item Level): 24,170 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 15 lb. This whitewashed circular shield has a flat, perfectly smooth face interrupted only by a small blue rectangular crystal set into its exact center. Once per day, you can raise this +1 heavy steel shield skyward and command a horizontal wall of force into existence. The wall of force has a 20-foot radius and hovers 5 feet above you, remaining above you as you move. It blocks all attacks from above, including catapult missiles and indirect fire (PH2 161). The wall of force lasts as long  While wearing this +1 leather, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Listen and Move Silently checks. In addition, the armor has three other special abilities. Once per day, you can activate the armor to gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Wisdom for 9 minutes. Twice per day, you can activate the armor to gain a +5 competence bonus on Spot checks for 10 minutes; this effect functions only while in shadowy illumination. Three times per day, you can cause the armor to sprout wings, allowing you to fly at a speed of 40 feet (good maneuverability) for 5 rounds. The special properties of a suit of owlfeather armor function normally while you are in wild shape (although it does not grant its armor bonus to AC). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, owl’s wisdom, wild shape. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 160 gp for masterwork leather), 320 XP, 8 days.  SERPENT ARMOR Price (Item Level): 12,160 gp (13th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 15 lb. This suit of armor looks to have been made from the deep green scales of some giant snake. A serpentine motif gives the armor’s gauntlets  20  620_10762_Chp1.indd 20  12/21/06 5:19:16 AM  Owlfeather armor  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Overhead shield  Serpent armor  This +1 leather provides you with a +1 resistance bonus on Reflex saving throws. While you wear it, you gain the benefit of the Combat Reflexes feat. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 160 gp for masterwork leather), 480 XP, 12 days.  to heal a creature by touch. The touched creature is healed of a number of points of damage equal to the extra damage that you would have dealt with the smite attack. For example, a 10th-level paladin could expend one use of her smite evil ability to heal 10 points of damage.  SHIELD OF MERCY Price (Item Level): 2,170 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration, transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 15 lb.  If you also wear a magic item that grants an enhancement bonus to your Wisdom score, you add the item’s bonus to the amount of damage healed by the shield of mercy. For example, if the 10thlevel paladin described above also wore a periapt of Wisdom +2, each use of smite evil she expended would heal 12 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cure moderate wounds, owl’s wisdom. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp (plus 170 gp for masterwork heavy steel shield), 80 XP, 2 days.  Illus. by D. Grifﬁth  the appearance of fanged reptilian heads. Its belt looks like a coiled snake, and a gemlike slitted eye stares out from the gorget.  SHIELD OF THE RESOLUTE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,520 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 7 lb.  This finely crafted shield is engraved with the image of a holy warrior healing a wounded beggar.  This shield is made from hundreds of strips of mithral, each a different size, color, and texture, riveted together in a patchwork design. Like other mithral shields, it is unusually light for its size.  A shield of mercy functions as a +1 heavy steel shield and also allows you to channel your destructive power into healing. You can expend a smite attempt (such as from a paladin’s smite evil class feature or the granted power of the Destruction domain) Shield of mercy  21  620_10762_Chp1.indd 21  12/21/06 5:19:20 AM  Illus. by W. England & W. Reynolds  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Despite its motley appearance, a shield of the resolute is a bulwark of defense. It functions as a +1 light fortification heavy mithral shield, provided that you are lawful good, neutral good, or lawful neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a shield of the resolute terrorizes enemies of the dwarves. Every goblinoid and giant within 30 feet of you that gazes upon the shield must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or be shaken (if its Hit Dice are equal to or greater than yours) or frightened (if it has fewer Hit Dice than you do) for 2 rounds. This effect functions like a gaze attack, so the saves must be made at the beginning of each affected creature’s turn every round, unless it takes measures to avoid seeing the shield (see DMG 294 for gaze attack rules). Unlike with a true gaze attack, you can’t use a standard action on your turn to use this effect against a creature. Once a creature has failed the save, the shield’s power has no further effect on that creature for 24 hours. To use the relic power, you must worship Moradin and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD.  Shield of the resolute  Lore: Shields of the resolute are said to be assembled from pieces of the shields carried by dwarves who fell in battle defending their homelands. When the Soul Forger gathers their souls, he creates these shields in his forge in remembrance of their valor (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, fear, limited wish or miracle. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp (plus 1,020 gp for heavy mithral shield), 180 XP, 5 days.  SHIELD OF THE SEVERED HAND [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 4,657 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 10 lb. This heavy wooden shield is emblazoned with a gory handprint and decorated with bloody symbols. The bloody marks appear fresh and wet. This gory item is favored by orcs for its shock value to enemies, as well as for its special properties. A shield of the severed hand functions as a +2 heavy wooden shield if you are chaotic evil, chaotic neutral, or neutral evil. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can activate this shield to make an immediate bull rush attempt (with a +4 bonus on the Strength check) against an adjacent opponent that has just attacked you in melee. This action does not provoke an attack of opportunity from that opponent. You can’t fall prone during this attempt, and you can’t follow the opponent if you push it back. To use the relic power, you must worship Gruumsh and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. Lore: The original shield of the severed hand was created when an orc warrior chopped off the hand of an elf king and mounted it on his shield. Upon the warrior’s death, the shield was placed on his blazing funeral pyre. Afterward, it was found intact amid the ashes, still bearing the palm print of its grisly burden (Knowledge [religion] DC 20).  Shield of the severed hand  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, Bigby’s forceful hand. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp (plus 157 gp for masterwork heavy wooden shield), 180 XP, 5 days.  TIGERSKIN ARMOR Price (Item Level): 17,100 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 25 lb. Striped fur, smelling thickly of some great beast, covers this chain shirt. While wearing this +1 mithral shirt, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Climb, Hide, Jump, and Move Silently checks.  22  620_10762_Chp1.indd 22  12/21/06 5:19:26 AM  This armor is prepared from a single layer of vampire skin and decorated with flanges and spikes. A gaunt, skull-like face with bat wings at the temples decorates the chestpiece.  WIGHT ARMOR Price (Item Level): 14,175 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 20 lb. On the breast of this black studded leather armor is the image of an oversized skull gnashing its pointed teeth. Severe edges give the armor a decidedly intimidating appearance. When you activate this +1 shadow studded leather, it makes a single touched creature or yourself imperceptible to undead (as if affected by the hide from undead spell). That creature also gains darkvision out to 60 feet while so affected.  Wight hide shield  This shield is covered in the hide of a wight, and in its center is a grotesque mockery of a humanoid face. When held, it seems to throb and pulse with unholy hunger.  Illus. by W. England & D. Grifﬁth  In addition, the armor has three other special abilities. Once per day, you can activate the armor to gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity for 9 minutes. Two times per day, you can activate the armor to gain the scent special quality (MM 314) for 5 rounds. Three times per day on command, the armor allows you to sprout a pair of claws. These claws deal 1d4 points of damage each (assuming you are Medium) and extend your natural reach by 5 feet. You can attack with both claws as though they were primary natural weapons. Alternatively, you can use a single claw to make an attack as a natural secondary weapon (–5 on the attack roll, no effect on your other attacks). If you charge a foe, you can attack with both claws at the end of the charge. These claws last for 5 rounds. The special properties of a suit of tigerskin armor function normally while you are in wild shape (although it does not grant its armor bonus to AC). Despite its mithral construction, druids are not prohibited from wearing this armor. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace, wild shape. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp (plus 1,100 gp for mithral shirt), 640 XP, 16 days.  Price (Item Level): 9,159 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 6 lb.  ARMOR  Tigerskin armor  WIGHT HIDE SHIELD CHAPTER 1  In addition to providing the protective qualities of +1 studded leather, a suit of vampire hide armor grants you damage reduction 5/silver or magic. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, create undead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 10,500 gp (plus 175 gp for masterwork studded leather), 840 XP, 21 days.  This property functions three times per day, and the effect lasts for 1 hour. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, darkvision, hide from undead. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp (plus 175 gp for masterwork studded leather), 560 XP, 14 days.  A wight hide shield functions as a +1 light steel shield. When you use a shield bash attack with a wight hide shield to deal damage to a living creature, the target must succeed on a DC 14 Fortitude save or gain one negative level (see PH 125 for rules on shield bash attacks). A wight hide shield can bestow no more than three negative levels per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, create undead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 159 gp for masterwork light steel shield), 360 XP, 9 days.  VAMPIRE HIDE ARMOR Price (Item Level): 21,175 gp (17th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 30 lb.  Wight armor  23  620_10762_Chp1.indd 23  12/21/06 5:19:31 AM  WRAPPED TOWER Price (Item Level): 6,180 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 45 lb.  Illus. by W. England  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  This tower shield is partially swathed in the funerary wrappings of a mummy. Atop it is a crest modeled to depict the creature’s horrifying, unwrapped visage. Once per day while using this +1 tower shield to gain total cover (PH 125), you can activate its special property. At your command, the mere sight of the shield’s mummylike facade requires each viewer in front of it to succeed on a DC 16 Will save or be paralyzed with fear for 1d4 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, create undead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cos t to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 180 gp for masterwork tower shield), 240 XP, 6 days.  ARMOR AND SHIELD AUGMENT CRYSTALS  Augment crystals are a new category of magic item. See page 221 for details on how they function.  CLASP OF ENERGY PROTECTION Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least), 1,500 gp (5th) (lesser), or 3,000 gp (7th) (greater) Body Slot: — (shield crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — Weight: —  Fire Protection This fiery red crystal is slightly warm to the touch.  Cold Protection This icy clear crystal is covered in a thin layer of frost.  Acid Protection Wrapped tower  ZOMBIE HIDE ARMOR Price (Item Level): 16,165 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 25 lb. This armor is prepared from a single layer of pieced and stitched zombie skin. Sections of the flesh appear rotted and torn. This suit of +1 hide grants you damage reduction 5/slashing. Though the armor sports various holes and rents, these imperfections in no way compromise its integrity. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate dead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp (plus 165 gp for masterwork hide), 640 XP, 16 days.  This hazy green crystal hisses faintly when exposed to the open air.  Electricity Protection This brilliant blue-white crystal crackles with static discharge when touched.  Sonic Protection This deep purple crystal gives off a faint hum, and rings with a sonorous chime when tapped. A crystal of energy protection protects against a specific form of energy: acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic. Least: This augment crystal grants resistance 5 to the designated energy type. Once the crystal has prevented a total of 25 points of energy damage, it becomes inert until the following day. Lesser: As above, except the crystal grants resistance 10, up to a maximum of 50 points per day. Greater: As above, except the crystal grants resistance 15, up to a maximum of 75 points per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, resist energy.  Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days (lesser); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF ADAMANT ARMOR Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) (least), 1,400 gp (5th) (lesser), or 3,400 gp (8th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor or shield crystal) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This clasp holds a small diamond orb with a sphere of steel at its center. A crystal of adamant armor strengthens your armor or shield against damage. Least: This augment crystal improves the hardness of a suit of armor or shield by 2. Lesser: This augment crystal improves the hardness of a suit of armor or shield by 5. Greater: This augment crystal improves the hardness of a suit of armor or shield by 10. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, diamondsteel (SC 64). Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day (least); 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days (lesser); 1,700 gp, 136 XP, 4 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF ADAPTATION Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least); 1,500 gp (5th) (lesser); or 3,000 gp (7th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — Weight: — This bright green, circular crystal is pleasantly warm to the touch. A crystal of adaptation protects you from hostile environments, both terrestrial and extraplanar. Least: This augment crystal protects you from temperature extremes as an endure elements spell. Lesser: As the least crystal, and you are also protected from all alignment traits of any plane (DMG 149).  24  620_10762_Chp1.indd 24  12/21/06 5:19:36 AM  Greater: As the lesser crystal, and you are also protected from the positive-dominant and negative-dominant traits of any planes (DMG 149). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, death ward, endure elements, protection from chaos/good/evil/law. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days (lesser); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (greater).  This sea-green crystal always feels moist to the touch. A crystal of aquatic action aids the wearer while underwater. Least: Any armor bearing this augment crystal does not impose an armor check penalty on your Swim checks. Lesser: As the least crystal, and you also gain a Swim speed equal to one-half your land speed (round down to the next 5-foot increment). Greater: As the lesser crystal, and you also take no penalties on attacks or movement while underwater (as if under the effect of freedom of movement) and you can breathe water as easily as air. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, freedom of movement, water breathing. Cost to Create: 125 gp, 10 XP, 1 day (least); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (lesser); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF ARROW DEFLECTION Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least), 2,500 gp (7th) (lesser), or 5,000 gp (9th) (greater) Body Slot: — (shield crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — Weight: — This blue sapphire is cut into a large cabochon. It contains a small flint arrowhead in its center.  CRYSTAL OF BENT SIGHT Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (shield crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — Weight: — This small crystal is affixed to a plate of polished silver. A crystal of bent sight offers a great boon to any who face creatures that have gaze attacks. When this augment crystal is attached to your shield, you can avert your eyes from a creature that has a gaze attack without suffering a miss chance on your attack rolls against that creature. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, clairaudience/clairvoyance. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  CRYSTAL OF GLANCING BLOWS Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least), 3,000 gp (7th) (lesser), or 5,000 gp (9th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: — All the hues of the rainbow—and many more—shimmer and dance across the surface of this multifaceted crystal. A crystal of glancing blows causes your armor to turn aside grasping attacks. Least: This augment crystal grants you a +2 competence bonus on grapple checks to prevent a grapple from being initiated (but not any other kind of grapple check, including those to initiate or escape a grapple).  CRYSTAL OF LIFEKEEPING  ARMOR  Price (Item Level): 250 gp (2nd) (least), 1,000 gp (4th) (lesser), or 3,000 gp (7th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  Lesser: As the least crystal, but the bonus is +5. Greater: As the least crystal, but the bonus is +10. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, freedom of movement. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (lesser); 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days (greater)  CHAPTER 1  CRYSTAL OF AQUATIC ACTION  A crystal of arrow deflection protects you from ranged weapon attacks. Least: This augment crystal grants you a +2 bonus to AC against ranged attacks. Lesser: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +5. Greater: As the least crystal, and you can deflect one ranged attack per round as if you had the Deflect Arrows feat. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shield. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days (lesser); 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days (greater).  Price (Item Level): 200 gp (2nd) (least), 1,000 gp (4th) (lesser), or 5,000 gp (9th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: —; see text Weight: — This bright crystal gleams and sparkles in the light. A crystal of lifekeeping wards you against necromantic and death effects. Least: This augment crystal grants you a +1 competence bonus on saving throws against energy drain attacks, inflict spells, death spells, and death effects. Lesser: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +3. Greater: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +5. In addition, if you fail a save against any of these effects, you can choose to reroll the save as an immediate (mental) action. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, death ward. Cost to Create: 100 gp, 8 XP, 1 day (least); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (lesser); 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF MIND CLOAKING Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least), 4,000 gp (8th) (lesser), or 10,000 gp (12th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: —; see text Weight: — This crystal is black as a clouded night sky. A crystal of mind cloaking protects you against mental infiltration.  25  620_10762_Chp1.indd 25  12/21/06 5:19:39 AM  ARMOR  CHAPTER 1  Least: This augment crystal grants you a +1 competence bonus on saving throws against mind-affecting spells and abilities. Lesser: As above, except the crystal grants a +3 competence bonus. Greater: As above, except the crystal grants a +5 competence bonus. In addition, if you fail a save against a mind-affecting spell or ability, you can choose to reroll the save as an immediate (mental) action. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, resistance. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days (lesser); 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF SCREENING Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) (least), 1,000 gp (4th) (lesser), or 3,000 gp (7th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — Weight: — This smooth, deep blue crystal is warm to the touch. A crystal of screening enhances a suit of armor with force, enabling it to protect you against the attacks of incorporeal foes. Least: This augment crystal imposes a –2 penalty on touch attacks made against you by incorporeal creatures. Lesser: As the least crystal, except the penalty is –5. Greater: As the least crystal, except the penalty is –10. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, mage armor. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day (least); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (lesser); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF STAMINA Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) (least), 900 gp (4th) (lesser), or 2,700 gp (7th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: —; see text Weight: —  This dull red crystal pulses in time with your heartbeat. A crystal of stamina protects you from assaults against your physical health. Least: This augment crystal grants you a +1 competence bonus on saving throws against disease and poison. Lesser: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +3. Greater: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +5. In addition, if you fail a save against a poison or disease effect, you can choose to reroll the save as an immediate (mental) action. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, neutralize poison, remove disease. Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day (least); 450 gp, 36 XP, 1 day (lesser); 1,350 gp, 108 XP, 3 days (greater).  IRON WARD DIAMOND Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least), 2,000 gp (6th) (lesser), or 8,000 gp (11th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Weight: — This dun and ecru diamond is incredibly durable. An iron ward diamond lends its toughness to armor, helping it absorb blows in combat. Least: The least version of this augment crystal grants you damage reduction 1/—. This damage reduction stacks with similar damage reduction granted by any other source. Once the clasp has prevented a total of 10 points of damage, it becomes inert until the following day. Lesser: As the least crystal, except that it grants damage reduction 3/— until it has prevented a total of 30 points of damage. A lesser iron ward diamond functions only when attached to medium or heavy armor. Greater: As the least crystal, except that it grants damage reduction 5/— until it has prevented a total of 50 points of damage. A greater iron ward diamond functions only when attached to heavy armor. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days (lesser); 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days (greater).  RESTFUL CRYSTAL Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: — Weight: — This silver clasp is decorated with sparkling crystals shaped like stars. A restful crystal is a great boon to any warrior who must stay always at the ready. Sleeping in armor that has this augment crystal attached does not make you fatigued. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, sleep. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  RUBICUND FRENZY Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least), 2,000 gp (6th) (lesser), or 6,000 gp (10th) (greater) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) enchantment Activation: — Weight: — This ruby is cut into a torus—beveled on top, flat below. It is meant to be attached to a suit of armor. A rubicund frenzy drinks your blood when you are wounded, whipping you into a savage frenzy. This item functions only for living creatures. Least: As long as your current hit point total is no greater than half your full normal hit points, this augment crystal grants you a +1 morale bonus on weapon damage rolls and saves against fear. Lesser: As the least crystal, except it grants a +3 morale bonus on weapon damage rolls and saves against fear. Greater: As the least crystal, except it grants a +5 morale bonus on weapon damage rolls and saves against fear. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, heroism. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days (lesser); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (greater).  26  620_10762_Chp1.indd 26  12/21/06 5:19:40 AM  Illus. by D. Kovacs  sking a warrior to enter battle without his most trusted Adamantine weapons are automatically of masterwork quality, blade is like asking him to give up his right arm. A and this cost is included in the weapon cost. sturdy suit of armor might keep a fighter or barbarian Hardness and Hit Points: Each +1 of enhancement bonus alive, but without a good weapon in his hand, he can’t adds 1 to a weapon’s hardness and 1 to its hit points. Only the weapwin the battle. on’s actual enhancement bonus applies; special properties with an This chapter collects over 100 special enhancement bonus equivalent for the purpose of determining market price don’t increase the weapon properties, plus dozens of specific “The best defense is a hardness or hit points of a weapon. magic weapons, each constructed with a parreally angry offense.” Weapon Subtypes: Some weapon entries ticular array of useful properties. have a subtype, either “synergy” or “relic,” in Special Materials: Five percent of weap—Krusk, brackets following the entry’s name. A synons are made of unusual materials, such as half-orc barbarian adamantine, cold iron, or alchemical silver. ergy item has a synergy prerequisite, typically Each of these special materials allows the weapon to overcome an existing special property already imbued into the weapon the damage reduction of certain creatures. Table 2–1 summarizes to be enhanced. A relic item has special effectiveness for a the additional effects of the most common special materials used character devoted to a particular deity. Additional rules for in weapons; see Special Materials, DMG 283, for more details. creating and using these items appear in Chapter 6.  Table 2–1: Weapon Special Materials Material Adamantine Cold iron Silver, alchemical  Effect Ignore hardness of less than 20 Magical enhancements ×2 cost –1 damage  Cost Modifier +3,000 gp* +2,000 gp +2 gp (ammunition) +20 gp (light weapon) +90 gp (one-handed weapon) +180 gp (two-handed or double weapon)  *Includes 300 gp for masterwork component.  27  620_10762_Chp2.indd 27  12/21/06 5:22:36 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  WEAPON PROPERTIES  A weapon with a special property must have at least a +1 enhancement bonus. You can’t simply have a flaming longsword—it would have to be at least a +1 flaming longsword. A single weapon cannot have a modified bonus (enhancement bonus plus property bonus equivalents) higher than +10, nor can it have a market price (not counting special materials or the price of the masterwork weapon itself) of greater than 200,000 gp (or 200,000 gp for each end of a double weapon). For weapons that exceed these limits, see Epic Level Handbook. Unless noted otherwise in the Property entry, each special property in this chapter can be added to any weapon. Some properties can be applied only to a particular category of weapons, and are so noted. A few properties can be added only to a smaller subset of a category (such as projectile weapons); this fact is stated in the item’s Property entry. The items in this section are arranged alphabetically.  ACIDIC BURST [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) and — Synergy Prerequisite: Corrosive The surface of this weapon is pitted and worn. An acidic burst weapon functions as a corrosive weapon (see page 31). In addition, the weapon automatically showers an opponent with acid upon a successful critical hit, dealing extra acid damage as set out on the table below. This acid does not harm you or any creature other than the target. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Even if the weapon has not been activated to deal the extra 1d6 points of acid damage that comes from the corrosive property, the weapon still deals its extra acid damage on a successful critical hit.  Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Acid Damage 1d10 2d10 3d10  Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Melf’s acid arrow. Cost to Create: Varies.  AQUAN Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Water constantly drips from the tip of this blue-green weapon. Its grip is inlaid with mother-of-pearl in a wavelike design. An aquan weapon automatically overcomes the damage reduction of any creature that has the fire subtype. In addition, the weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against such creatures. An aquan weapon also bestows one negative level on any creature that has the fire subtype and attempts to wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when the weapon is no longer held. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the weapon is wielded. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, water subtype. Cost to Create: Varies.  AQUATIC Price: +2,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — This weapon has a silvery-blue tinge, like the sheen of white scales in sunlight. While wielding an aquatic weapon, you do not incur any penalties that would otherwise apply to using the weapon underwater (DMG 92), as though you were affected by a freedom of movement spell. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armors, freedom of movement. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  ARCANE MIGHT Price: +1 bonus Property: Bows (not crossbows) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) This elegant, supple bow has intricate runes carved along its length. You can channel the energy of your arcane spells through this bow to make the arrows fired from it more damaging. As a swift action, you can sacrifice a prepared arcane spell from memory (or an unused spell slot if you are a spontaneous arcane caster). Doing so grants a bonus equal to the sacrificed spell’s level on the next damage roll you make with the bow that turn. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, greater magic weapon. Cost to Create: Varies.  AURAN Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Wind constantly whistles along the length of this white-enameled weapon. Its grip is inlaid with whorls of silver that resemble clouds. An auran weapon automatically overcomes the damage reduction of any creature that has the earth subtype. In addition, the weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against such creatures. An auran weapon also bestows one negative level on any creature that has the earth subtype and attempts to wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when the weapon is no longer held. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the weapon is wielded. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, air subtype. Cost to Create: Varies.  BANISHING Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: Free (command)  28  620_10762_Chp2.indd 28  12/21/06 5:22:38 AM  A barely visible bead of light slowly traces the outline of this weapon.  Price: +1 bonus Property: Two-handed melee weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: — Though tarnished and battered, this simple weapon is incredibly durable, the scars of a hundred battles marring its surface. In your hands, a berserker weapon deals an extra 1d8 points of damage on any successful attack while you are raging. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, rage. Cost to Create: Varies.  BINDING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) This weapon has a length of chain looped decoratively around its grip or head. When you activate a binding weapon, the next successful attack you make  Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) This weapon has a faint glow emanating from within it. A blessed weapon is treated as goodaligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. This effect is continuous and requires no activation. In addition, three times per day you can activate a blessed weapon to automatically confirm all critical threats against evil foes for 1 round (as if the weapon were affected by the bless weapon spell). Other effects related to threatening or confirming critical hits (such as the keen edge spell or the vorpal weapon property) don’t confer an additional benefit on a weapon that has this property. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bless weapon. Cost to Create: Varies.  BLINDSIGHTED Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: Standard (command) The form of a screeching bat’s head adorns the end of this weapon, and images of wings and fluttering nocturnal forms run along its length. When activated, a blindsighted weapon emits a susurrus of whispered notes (Listen DC 10). While wielding the activated weapon, you gain blindsight out to 30 feet. This effect is negated by silence spells and effects. The blindsighted property functions three times per day, and the effect lasts for 1 minute.  BLOODFEEDING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — and free (command) This weapon has a blood-red tint. Every time a bloodfeeding weapon deals damage to a living creature, it gains 1 “blood point,” which it can store for up to 1 hour. The weapon can store a maximum of 10 blood points. This effect is continuous and requires no activation. When you deal damage to a creature while wielding a bloodfeeding weapon, you can activate the weapon to spend up to 5 stored blood points. Each blood point you spend in this way deals an extra 2 points of damage to that creature. The weapon doesn’t gain any blood points from a strike on which you use this ability. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: Varies.  WEAPONS  BERSERKER  BLESSED  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, see invisibility. Cost to Create: Varies.  CHAPTER 2  When you strike an extraplanar creature of 26 Hit Dice or fewer while wielding a weapon that has this property, you can activate the weapon to banish that creature back to its home plane (Will DC 20 negates). A creature so banished cannot return for at least 24 hours. A creature that succeeds on its save cannot be banished by the same weapon for 24 hours. If the creature struck has damage reduction that requires a particular weapon alignment or special material to overcome, increase the save DC by 2 for each such property shared by the weapon. For example, if you use a holy banishing cold iron weapon against a hezrou (damage reduction 10/good), the save DC would increase by 2, while against a marilith (damage reduction 10/ good and cold iron), the save DC would increase by 4. The banishing property can be activated three times per day. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, banishment. Cost to Create: Varies.  with it before the end of your turn prevents the target from using any form of extradimensional travel, as the dimensional anchor spell. The binding property functions two times per day, and the effect lasts for 10 minutes. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dimensional anchor. Cost to Create: Varies.  BLOODSTONE Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: Free (command) The blade of this weapon bears red crystals carefully inlaid in intricate designs. A bloodstone weapon can store and cast a vampiric touch spell against a creature it strikes, just as if it were a spell storing weapon (DMG 225). Any such spell cast from a bloodstone weapon is automatically empowered (as if by the Empower Spell feat). A bloodstone weapon can store no more than one such spell at any time, and it cannot store a spell other than vampiric touch. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Empower Spell, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: Varies.  BLURSTRIKE Price: +2 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) illusion Activation: Swift (command)  29  620_10762_Chp2.indd 29  12/21/06 5:22:40 AM  BRASH Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: —  CHAPTER 2  A slight vibration runs through this weapon, and a barely audible sound, like that of a distant battle cry, seems to echo from within it.  WEAPONS  If you enter a rage while wielding a brash weapon, the rage lasts for an extra 3 rounds. In addition, while raging and wielding a brash weapon, you gain immunity to fear effects. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, remove fear. Cost to Create: Varies.  BRUTAL SURGE  Illus. by M. Faulkner  Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Swift (command) This weapon is broader, thicker, and darker in color than a normal weapon of its type.  A blurstrike weapon  This weapon is semitransparent, almost as though it were glass, but it is obviously of sturdier make. When activated, a blurstrike weapon partially fades from view for 1 round, appearing only as a faint outline (though you, as the wielder, can see it normally). When you attack, an activated blurstrike weapon (along with your hand and arm) appears to others as an amorphous blur, preventing a foe from knowing exactly where the blow is aimed. After you activate this property, your opponent is considered flat-footed against the first attack you make with the blurstrike weapon in the round when you activate it. Creatures that don’t rely on sight for combat (such as those with the blindsight special quality) and creatures with uncanny dodge aren’t treated as flat-footed against this attack. The blurstrike property functions ten times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blur. Cost to Create: Varies.  BODYFEEDER Price: +3 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: — Composed of a dark, dull metal, this weapon is cold to the touch. Indeed, it seems to absorb your body heat. Whenever a bodyfeeder weapon you wield scores a successful critical hit against a living creature, you gain temporary hit points equal to half the damage dealt by the critical hit. These temporary hit points last for up to 1 minute and don’t stack with those from any other source, including additional critical hits with this weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch or claws of the vampire (EPH 84). Cost to Create: Varies.  After a successful melee attack with a brutal surge weapon, you can command the weapon to initiate a bull rush attempt against the target of the attack in addition to dealing its normal damage. This attempt does not provoke attacks of opportunity and is resolved using your size, Strength, and other relevant characteristics. If you wield a brutal surge weapon in two hands, you gain a +2 bonus on the opposed Strength check. If successful, the bull rush pushes the affected creature back the greatest possible distance allowed by the result of the opposed check, but you do not move along with the target. Movement caused by this bull rush attempt provokes attacks of opportunity from other creatures normally, but you cannot make an attack of opportunity against the affected creature. The brutal surge property is usable a number of times per day equal to 1 + your Con bonus (if any). Once you activate this property, it can’t be activated by any other creature until the following day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Bigby’s forceful hand. Cost to Create: Varies.  30  620_10762_Chp2.indd 30  12/21/06 5:22:42 AM  CHANGELING Price: +2,000 gp Property: Spear, shortspear, or longspear Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command)  CONSUMPTIVE Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Standard (command)  This delicately balanced weapon settles into your grip as if you had wielded it for years. Its blue-gray hue shimmers as you heft the weapon.  This weapon is dark in color, and its blade or head is covered with menacing runes.  A collision weapon temporarily increases its own mass at the end point of each swing or shot. When you wield such a weapon, you deal an extra 5 points of damage with each hit. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition.  CHARGEBREAKER  When activated, a consumptive weapon is shrouded in negative energy that seems to draw light into it. The negative energy does not harm you as long as you have the weapon in hand. The effect persists until you speak a second command word. A weapon that has this property deals an extra 1d8 points of damage to any living creature on a successful hit. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, enervation. Cost to Create: Varies.  CORROSIVE  Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: —  Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Standard (command)  This weapon’s tip is rounded slightly, like that of a jousting lance.  The surface of this weapon looks dark and pitted, and the blade, point, or head appears fragile, as if the first blow might break it.  Any charging creature hit by a chargebreaker weapon must succeed on a DC 14 Fortitude save or be knocked prone. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, daze monster. Cost to Create: Varies.  When activated, a corrosive weapon is sheathed in acid. The acid does not harm you as long as you have the weapon in hand. The effect persists until you speak a second command word. A weapon that has this property deals an extra 1d6 points of acid damage on a successful hit. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, acid fog, acid storm (SC 7), Melf’s acid arrow, or storm of vengeance. Cost to Create: Varies.  CHARGING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: —  CURSESPEWING  The image of a heavily armored, mounted knight, leveling a ribbon-covered lance for a charge, adorns this weapon.  Price: +3 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: —  When you are mounted and wielding a weapon that has this property, you deal an extra 2d6 points of damage on a successful charge attack. A brutal surge longsword  620_10762_Chp2.indd 31  WEAPONS  Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: —  Illus. by W. England  A changeling weapon allows you to choose its length and appearance each time you attack with it. Once per round, by speaking the appropriate command word, you can change the weapon into a spear, a shortspear, or a longspear sized appropriately for you. As part of the same action, you can make its haft and head appear to be composed of any wood, stone, metal, or combination thereof that you want, and add any decorative flourishes desired, though the spear’s actual composition does not change. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  COLLISION  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, weapon of impact (SC 237). Cost to Create: Varies.  CHAPTER 2  This spear appears to be made entirely of a metal with a bright silver sheen, and the head is joined seamlessly to the haft.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Spirited Charge, keen edge. Cost to Create: Varies.  31  12/21/06 5:22:46 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  A barely perceptible dark glow surrounds this weapon. Whenever this weapon scores a critical hit against a target, it bestows a curse that imposes a –4 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks for 1 minute. Multiple strikes aren’t cumulative with one another. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bestow curse. Cost to Create: Varies.  DEADLY PRECISION Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This weapon looks more slender and elegant than others of its type. Its blade, point, or head glitters as though a thousand tiny facets were reflecting the ambient light. A deadly precision weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage whenever you make a successful sneak attack or sudden strike (CAd 8) with it. The property grants no benefit if you don’t already have one of these class features, and its bonus doesn’t increase if you have both. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, keen edge. Cost to Create: Varies.  DEFENSIVE SURGE Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) This weapon is thicker and heavier than a normal weapon of its type, but it feels well balanced. Its hilt or grip is set with a smoothly rounded topaz. After a successful melee attack with a defensive surge weapon in any round in which you use the Combat Expertise feat or fight defensively, you can activate the weapon and gain an additional +2 bonus to Armor Class until the start of your next turn. This ability is usable a number of times per day equal to 1 + your Int bonus (if any). Once you activate this property, it can’t be activated by any other creature until the following day.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shield. Cost to Create: Varies.  DESICCATING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: — This weapon looks cracked and parched, as if it has spent decades baking in the desert sun. A desiccating weapon destroys the water in a living creature that it strikes, dealing an extra 1d4 points of damage (or an extra 1d8 points against plants and against elementals that have the water subtype). Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, desiccating bubble (SC 63). Cost to Create: Varies.  DESICCATING BURST [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Dessicating All the moisture seems to have been sapped from this brittle, gray weapon, as if it’s been buried below shifting sands for centuries. A desiccating burst weapon functions as a desiccating weapon (see above). In addition, the weapon explodes with a dehydrating blast on a successful critical hit, dealing extra damage as set out in the table below. (This effect activates even if the target is not normally vulnerable to extra damage from critical hits.) The amount of damage is determined by the weapon’s critical muliplier and is doubled against plants and against elementals that have the water subtype. This burst does not harm you or any creature other than the target. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Even if the weapon has not been activated to deal extra damage because of the desiccating property, the weapon still deals its extra damage on a successful critical hit.  Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Damage 1d8 2d8 3d8  Plant/ Elemental Damage 2d8 4d8 6d8  In addition, the critical hit renders the struck creature fatigued for 8 hours or until it consumes at least 1 gallon of water or some other rehydrating liquid. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, horrid wilting. Cost to Create: Varies.  DISARMING Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Moderate; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Several jutting prongs and ridges extend from this weapon. A disarming weapon grants you a +2 bonus on disarm attempts. In addition, opponents cannot disarm you of this weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: Varies.  DISLOCATOR Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: Swift (mental) Discolorations in the surface of this weapon appear, then fade in a random pattern. An elaborate handle contains a thumb-sized indent. When you activate a dislocator weapon, the next successful attack you make before the end of your turn causes your target to be teleported up to 10 feet in any direction you choose (Will DC 17 negates). You can’t teleport a target into an occupied space (such an attempt automatically fails and wastes the effect). Projectile weapons bestow this property on their ammunition. A dislocator weapon functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, teleport. Cost to Create: Varies.  32  620_10762_Chp2.indd 32  12/21/06 5:22:50 AM  DISLOCATOR, GREAT [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Synergy Prerequisite: Dislocator Brilliant discolorations in the surface of this weapon appear, then fade in a random pattern. An elaborate handle contains a thumb-sized indent coated in gold filigree.  Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Free (command) Arcane symbols cover this weapon, but many are scratched out and defaced, obscuring any meaning. When you strike a creature or object with a dispelling weapon, you can activate it to target that creature or object with a targeted dispel magic effect (as the spell). A dispelling weapon functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dispel magic. Cost to Create: Varies.  DISPELLING, GREATER [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Synergy Prerequisite: Dispelling A single, incredibly complex arcane formula covers every inch of this weapon, but deep gashes and complex scratches cover it, as if purposefully destroying its meaning. This weapon functions as a dispelling weapon (see above), except that when you activate it, the creature or object struck is affected by a targeted greater dispel magic effect (as the spell). A greater dispelling weapon functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, greater dispel magic. Cost to Create: Varies.  This weapon has a golden sheen, and its grip is imprinted with a hand holding a lightning bolt. Divine wrath weapons are especially prized by paladins and clerics of Heironeous. Whenever you hold such a weapon in your hand, you can expend a turn undead attempt to imbue it with divine power for 1 round. If your next successful attack with it hits an undead target, the weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage per point of Charisma bonus you possess (minimum 1d6). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, searing light, turn undead, good alignment. Cost to Create: Varies.  DOMINEERING Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — A single, screaming skull adorns this weapon, its eyes set with raw black onyx inlays that give it a soulless look. A creature hit by a domineering weapon becomes shaken for 1 minute (Will DC 16 negates). This effect doesn’t stack with itself or with any other fear effects (it can’t render an already shaken creature frightened, for example). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fear. Cost to Create: Varies.  DOOM BURST Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — This weapon is enveloped in a shroud of darkness. Whenever you score a critical hit with this weapon, a wave of blackness washes over the target, causing it to become shaken (no saving throw) for 5 rounds. This effect activates even if the creature struck is not  DRAGONDOOM Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command)  WEAPONS  DISPELLING  Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Swift (mental)  normally subject to extra damage from critical hits. This effect doesn’t stack with itself or with any other fear effects (it can’t render an already shaken creature frightened, for example). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fear. Cost to Create: Varies.  CHAPTER 2  This property functions as a dislocator weapon (see above), except the target can be teleported up to 30 feet in any direction (Will DC 20 negates). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, greater teleport. Cost to Create: Varies.  DIVINE WRATH  This weapon is engraved with a severed dragon’s head. When wielding a dragondoom weapon, you can choose to deliver a smite attack against a Large or larger creature of the dragon type up to three times each day. For every size category of the dragon larger than Medium, the smite attack deals an extra 1d6 points of damage (+1d6 against a Large dragon, +2d6 against Huge, +3d6 against Gargantuan, and +4d6 against Colossal). You must declare the smite attack before you make your attack roll. If the attack misses (or the creature you strike is not of the dragon type), the smite is wasted. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fell the greatest foe (SC 90). Cost to Create: Varies.  DRAGONHUNTER Price: +1 bonus Property: Projectile weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation, necromancy Activation: — This weapon is carved from a dragon’s thighbone. The image of a dragon’s skeleton is inlaid in jet. A creature of the dragon type that is hit by a projectile fi red from this weapon takes 1 point of Strength damage in addition to the normal damage from the weapon. In addition, the weapon’s critical multiplier increases by 1 if the target is a dragon. For example, a critical hit from a dragonhunter longbow has a ×4 damage multiplier (instead of the normal ×3) against a dragon, so such a creature would take four times normal damage (but still only 1 point of Strength damage) with a critical hit.  33  620_10762_Chp2.indd 33  12/21/06 5:22:51 AM  Other effects related to threatening or confirming critical hits (such as keen edge or bless weapon spells) don’t function when placed on a weapon that has this property. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, keen edge, ray of enfeeblement. Cost to Create: Varies.  EAGER WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: —  Illus. by W. England  This weapon, which is decorated with a wing motif, vibrates slightly, as though with excitement. An eager weapon can be drawn as a free action. While wielding it, you gain a +2 bonus on initiative checks and a +2 bonus on damage rolls made during a surprise round and the first round of combat. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: Varies.  ENERGY AURA Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) evocation Activation: Standard (command) The surface of this weapon seems to gleam with ever-shifting colors. From time to time, it glows with heat, crackles with electricity, emits acrid-smelling fumes, or develops a rime of frost. Once activated, each hit by this weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage of an energy type of your choice (acid, cold, electricity, or fire, chosen when activated). This energy does not harm you, regardless of the type selected. The energy damage remains the same until you activate the weapon again. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, chill metal, flame blade, Melf’s acid arrow, shocking grasp. Cost to Create: Varies.  ENERGY SURGE [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Synergy Prerequisite: Corrosive, flaming, frost, or shock The pommel of this weapon bears a single diamond that flashes with an inner radiance. An energy surge weapon functions as a weapon of the prerequisite type (corrosive, flaming, frost, or shock). In addition, on a successful melee attack with an energy surge weapon, you can command it to expel a blast of energy, of the same type as the prerequisite property, which deals an extra 3d6 points of damage to the target of the attack. The synergy prerequisite property need not be active to activate the energy surge property. This ability is usable a number of times per day equal to 1 + your Con bonus (if any). Once you activate this property, it can’t be activated by any other creature until the following day. A weapon can have this property more than once, but only once per synergy prerequisite, and each activation only triggers one type of surge. For example, you could have a +1 corrosive surge flaming surge longsword, and each activation would deal either 3d6 points of acid damage or 3d6 points of fire damage. Each diamond set into the pommel or haft of an energy surge weapon radiates a different color that corresponds to the energy damage dealt by the weapon: green (acid), blue (cold), yellow (electricity), or red (fire). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, spell for the prerequisite property. Cost to Create: Varies.  ENERVATING Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — This weapon looks worn and its blade has ruddy tinge, as though it has been stained with blood. Four blood-red rubies surround the weapon’s bronze pommel. When you score a critical hit against a living creature with an enervating weapon, the weapon bestows one negative level on the target. Assuming the subject survives, it regains lost levels after 1 hour. Usually, negative levels have a chance of permanently draining a victim’s levels, but the negative levels from the enervating property don’t last long enough to do so. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, enervation. Cost to Create: Varies.  ETHEREAL REAVER Price: +3 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: — This weapon appears ghostly, but it is as solid and unforgiving as any other of its type. An ethereal reaver weapon functions as a ghost touch weapon (DMG 224). In addition, such a weapon allows you to see invisible creatures as if you were subject to a see invisibility spell. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, see invisibility. Cost to Create: Varies.  EVERBRIGHT Price: +2,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Flecks of marble and pearl shimmer across this weapon, set within images of bursting stars and beaming suns.  +1 enervating kukri  An everbright weapon can flash with a brilliant light twice per day at your command. When it is activated, all creatures within 20 feet of you are blinded for 1 round (Reflex DC 14 negates).  34  620_10762_Chp2.indd 34  12/21/06 5:22:53 AM  An everbright weapon is also immune to acid damage and rusting effects. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, searing light. Cost to Create: Varies.  FIERCEBANE [SYNERGY]  (Knowledge [arcana] or Knowledge [history] DC 30). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, summon monster I. Cost to Create: Varies.  FLESHGRINDING  Carved into the handle of this weapon is a single rune in the Gnome language representing the foe the weapon is dedicated to slaying.  Upon close inspection, this weapon appears to have shallow serrations along its blade.  A fiercebane weapon excels at attacking one type or subtype of creature. It acts as a bane weapon against the creature type (and subtype, if relevant) to which its synergy prerequisite ability was attuned. Whenever it strikes its designated bane enemy, it begins to emit a low, eager hum, as if it were actually feeding off the victim’s life blood. A fiercebane weapon glows when a designated foe comes within 60 feet, even if you cannot see or detect it. In addition, the weapon deals extra damage on every successful critical hit. The amount depends on its critical multiplier, as follows. Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Damage 1d10 2d10 3d10  Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Lore: Few rangers acquire the skills needed to create magic items, but the gnome ranger Tir Hearthand learned to hate orcs at an early age. Unsatisfied with normal orc bane weapons, he devoted the last half of his life to creating the ultimate weapon for slaying orcs (Knowledge [arcana] or Knowledge [history] DC 20). The first fiercebane weapon was an orc bane scimitar sized for a gnome and named Hearthand, after its creator. Tir Hearthand wielded this weapon for many years, and it eventually achieved a near-legendary status. Gnomes with an interest in weaponcraft now believe it to be a potent artifact capable of striking dead any orc that even sets eyes upon it. The original weapon is believed to have been lost in the dark hills near the long-dead orc kingdom where Tir Hearthand met his end  You can activate a fleshgrinding weapon any time you deal damage with it to a living creature in melee. When this occurs, you let go of the weapon and it magically animates, grinding itself into the foe’s flesh. In each round at the start of your turn, it automatically damages that creature as if you had scored a normal hit with it (including damage from the weapon’s enhancement bonus, other weapon properties, and your normal bonus from Strength, but not extra damage from feats such as Power Attack). The grinding continues for 5 rounds or until you or someone else pulls the fleshgrinding weapon free; doing this requires a standard action and (for anyone other than you) a successful DC 20 Strength check. After the duration expires, a fleshgrinding weapon returns to your hand (as the returning weapon property). It will not return to your hand if the target has pulled the weapon free and still holds it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate objects. Cost to Create: Varies.  FORCE Price: +2 bonus Property: Projectile weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — This weapon appears translucent, as though its substance is not entirely of this world. A projectile weapon with the force property turns ammunition shot from it into a force attack. These force projectiles automatically overcome damage reduction and suffer no miss chance against incorporeal targets, but they don’t damage creatures immune to force effects. Ammunition shot  GHOST STRIKE [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Ghost touch  WEAPONS  Price: +2 bonus Property: Piercing or slashing melee weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Free (command)  CHAPTER 2  Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Bane  from a force weapon deals the same amount of damage as normal ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic missile. Cost to Create: Varies.  Fine tendrils of white smoke slowly rise from this weapon’s surface. A ghost strike weapon functions as a ghost touch weapon (DMG 224). In addition, sneak attacks and critical hits made with a ghost strike weapon against an undead creature affect it as if it were a living creature. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, undeath to death. Cost to Create: Varies.  HARMONIZING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) illusion Activation: —; see text A strange melody seems to emanate from within this weapon. A harmonizing weapon accompanies you in song if drawn, granting a +2 competence bonus on Perform (sing) checks. In addition, if you hold a harmonizing weapon when you begin a bardic music effect, the weapon can continue the effect for you, allowing you to focus on other efforts. One round after you begin a bardic music effect that allows or requires continued use or concentration (including inspire courage, countersong, fascinate, inspire competence, inspire greatness, song of freedom, and inspire heroics), the weapon picks up and continues the performance flawlessly for 10 rounds, until you start another bardic music effect, or until you command it to end as a swift (mental) action. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, ghost sound, bardic music. Cost to Create: Varies.  35  620_10762_Chp2.indd 35  12/21/06 5:22:56 AM  HEAVENLY BURST Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: —  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  This weapon emits a low hum that sounds distinctly like a chorus chanting slowly. On a critical hit against an evil creature, a heavenly burst weapon discharges a shower of radiance that deals 3d6 points of damage to the target and blinds it for 1 round. A successful DC 14 Fortitude save negates the blindness. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, holy smite. Cost to Create: Varies.  HIDEAWAY Price: +2,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Several studs texture this weapon, as do numerous hinges and slots, though none seems to impede its effectiveness. When activated, a hideaway weapon folds up into a bundle two size categories smaller than you, making it easy to conceal. You gain a +2 bonus on Sleight of Hand checks to conceal a hideaway weapon when it’s folded up (as if it were a dagger). A second command word (also a swift action) causes the weapon to unfold to its normal shape. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  HOLY SURGE [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — and swift (command) Synergy Prerequisite: Holy This elegant weapon appears smooth and pristine. Characters who serve gods of valor, honor, and other lofty principles craft these weapons of pure goodness for themselves  and others who share their values. A holy surge weapon functions as a holy weapon (DMG 225). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, on a successful melee attack with a holy surge weapon, you can command it to emit a burst of holy energy. Against an evil target, this burst deals an extra 3d6 points of damage. If used against a non-evil creature, it deals no additional damage, and that use of the property is wasted. This ability is usable a number of times per day equal to 1 + your Cha bonus (if any). Once you activate this property, it can’t be activated by any other creature until the following day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, holy smite or holy word. Cost to Create: Varies.  HUNTING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — This weapon bears toothlike inscriptions across its surface. A hunting weapon increases your bonus on weapon damage rolls by 4 against your favored enemies (see the ranger class feature; PH 47). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, greater magic fang. Cost to Create: Varies.  IGNAN Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Tiny flames constantly flicker along the surface of this red-tinted weapon. Its grip is inlaid with amber in a flamelike design. An ignan weapon automatically overcomes the damage reduction of any creature that has the water subtype. In addition, the weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against such targets. An ignan weapon also bestows one negative level on any creature that has the water subtype and attempts to wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when it is no longer held. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be  overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the weapon is wielded. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fire subtype. Cost to Create: Varies.  ILLUMINATING Price: +500 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — A sunburst set with topaz flecks gleams upon this weapon. When drawn, an illuminating weapon glows with pure white light, brightly illuminating a 20-foot-radius area and providing shadowy illumination for another 20 feet beyond that. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, light. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  ILLUSION BANE Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) divination Activation: — and swift (command) Worked into the grip of this weapon is an iron cross set in the center of two concentric circles. Any attack with an illusion bane weapon ignores any miss chance created by an illusion effect (including effects that mimic illusions, such as a displacer beast’s displacement effect). However, you must still target the correct square when making an attack against a for that has total concealment. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, once per day you can activate an illusion bane weapon to destroy illusion effects. This ability can take one of two forms: After hitting a creature, you can activate the weapon in the same round to make a dispel check (1d20+10) against each illusion spell currently affecting the target. This effect essentially acts as a targeted dispel magic spell, but it functions only against magic of the illusion school. You must make a separate check for each illusion spell affecting the target. Alternatively, you can attempt to dispel a single illusion by touching it with the  36  620_10762_Chp2.indd 36  12/21/06 5:22:58 AM  [SYNERGY] Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) divination Activation: Standard (command) Synergy Prerequisite: Illusion bane This dark metal weapon is crafted of black iron and adamantine worked into a simple design. Set into its pommel or grip is a cut and polished piece of quartz. An illusion theft weapon functions as an illusion bane weapon (see above). In addition, such a weapon allows you to disrupt opponents’ illusions and transfer their protective qualities to yourself. The first illusion spell that this weapon dispels with its illusion bane property is automatically stored within it. This ability functions like the spell storing property (DMG 225), with the following exceptions. • It must be an illusion spell, but it need not be 3rd level or lower. • A spell cannot be cast into the weapon; it can store only a spell that it has actually dispelled through the illusion bane ability. • An illusion theft weapon need not actually strike a creature to activate the stored spell. The stored spell is preserved as originally cast in every way, except that its duration is effectively arrested at the time you steal it. As soon as the spell is stored, you imme-  IMPACT Price: +1 bonus Property: Bludgeoning weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — This weapon seems heavier than a typical weapon of its type, and its head and haft have a square design. An impact weapon has double the threat range of a normal weapon of its type. For example, an impact quarterstaff scores a threat on a roll of 19–20, and an impact heavy flail scores a threat on a roll of 17–20. This effect doesn’t stack with any other effect that expands a weapon’s critical threat range. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, weapon of impact (SC 237). Cost to Create: Varies.  IMPALING Price: +1 bonus Property: Piercing melee weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) This weapon has a particularly sharp and slim point. Three times per day, you can activate this weapon to treat its next attack (if made before the end of your turn) as a touch attack. You must declare that you are using this property before making your attack roll. If the attack misses, the use is wasted. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, find the gap (SC 91). Cost to Create: Varies.  IMPEDANCE Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: — This weapon is reinforced with cold iron and set with chunks of obsidian in a foursquare pattern. An impedance weapon mimics the impeded magic planar trait (DMG 150). When you use it to strike a creature, the target’s ability to cast spells or use spelllike abilities is impeded for 1d6 rounds. To cast an impeded spell or use an impeded spell-like ability, the creature must attempt a Spellcraft check, Intelligence check, or Charisma check (whichever one is made with the highest bonus). The DC for this check is 15 + the spell level. If the check succeeds, the effect functions normally; if the check fails, the effect does not function and the spell or the use of the spell-like ability is lost. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, antimagic field. Cost to Create: Varies.  WEAPONS  ILLUSION THEFT  diately become aware of its effect and its remaining duration, and you can activate it at any time. You can choose a different target to be affected by the stored spell if you so desire. When the spell is activated, the duration begins passing again as if no time had elapsed. Once a stored illusion spell has been discharged, you cannot activate the weapon’s illusion theft property again until you have successfully dispelled another illusion (using the illusion bane property), which is then stored within the weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, true seeing, dispel magic. Cost to Create: Varies.  CHAPTER 2  illusion bane weapon and speaking the appropriate command word. For example, touching a silent image spell (or an image generated by the mirror image spell) with the weapon subjects it to the dispel check immediately. A successful check against any part of the illusion dispels the whole effect, so dispelling one mirror image ends the spell entirely for the target creature. Lore: The illusion bane property was created by a sect of the church of St. Cuthbert whose members despised illusionists and desired a way to destroy their protective illusions (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). An illusion bane weapon functions much like the dispel magic spell, but only against illusion effects (Knowledge [arcana] DC 25). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, true seeing, dispel magic. Cost to Create: Varies.  IMPLACABLE Price: +3 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — This weapon has a lustrous purple sheen. When an implacable weapon deals damage to a living creature, the wound bleeds profusely and the creature takes 2 additional points of damage at the start of each of the wielder’s turns for the next 5 rounds. Multiple wounds are cumulative (a creature struck three times in the same round would take 6 points of damage per round for the next 5 rounds). This bleeding can be stopped by a successful DC 15 Heal check or any effect that restores hit points (such as cure light wounds). However, while the wound is active, anyone attempting to cast a spell on the target that would restore hit points must succeed on a DC 15 caster level check. An implacable weapon counts as adamantine for the purpose of overcoming the damage reduction of aberrations. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: Varies.  37  620_10762_Chp2.indd 37  12/21/06 5:22:59 AM  INCORPOREAL BINDING [SYNERGY]  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Ghost touch This weapon is simple in design and appears misty gray, even though the base material used in its construction has a distinct color of its own. An incorporeal binding weapon functions as a ghost touch weapon (DMG 224). In addition, when this weapon strikes an incorporeal creature, it emits a single pulse of gray energy that temporarily anchors the target more firmly to the material world. An incorporeal creature damaged by this weapon loses the benefit of its incorporeal miss chance (50%) and its 50% chance to ignore spells for 1 round. It does, however, retain all other benefits of incorporealness, including immunity to all nonmagical attack forms, the ability to pass through solid objects, and a deflection bonus to AC equal to its Charisma bonus (if any). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dimensional anchor, plane shift. Cost to Create: Varies.  KNOCKBACK Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Swift (command) This weapon looks broader and thicker than a typical item of its type. A ram’s head with curling horns decorates its head or hilt. Three times per day, you can activate this weapon and use it to drive your opponent back. The next time you hit a creature with the weapon before the end of your turn, the target must succeed on a DC 19 Fortitude save or be pushed back 5 feet. If the target can’t move back, this ability has no effect. The knockback property works only on creatures of your own size category or smaller. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, repulsion. Cost to Create: Varies.  LUCKY Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) divination Activation: Free (mental) The golden sheen on this weapon raises your spirits and fills you with confidence in your fighting prowess. A lucky weapon offers a second chance at success. Once per day, you can reroll a single failed attack roll. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, moment of prescience or fate of one (EPH 107). Cost to Create: Varies.  MAGEBANE Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — The surface of this black iron weapon is inscribed with runes representing the grounding of energy, and its pommel or grip is set with three diamonds. Weapons that have this property are feared by arcane spellcasters. Against any creature that can cast arcane spells or use invocations (CAr 7), a magebane weapon’s enhancement bonus is 2 higher than normal. (Thus, a +1 longsword with the magebane property becomes a +3 longsword when wielded against such targets.) Furthermore, a magebane weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against targets capable of casting arcane spells or using invocations. The magebane property can be added to a cold iron weapon without paying the extra 2,000 gp (DMG 284). Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dispel magic. Cost to Create: Varies.  MAIMING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: —  A maiming weapon twists and digs into the flesh of its target, rending, tearing, smashing, and bruising it. Whenever you score a critical hit with this weapon, it deals an amount of extra damage depending on its critical multiplier. Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Damage 1d6 2d6 3d6  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, keen edge. Cost to Create: Varies.  MANIFESTER Price: +12,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) divination Activation: Free (mental) Radiating inner power, this princely weapon settles and clarifies your thoughts. When manifesting a power, the bearer of this weapon can draw 5 power points from it. These points must be all be used on the same power, and that power cannot be imbued with power points from any other source. A manifester weapon functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, any 3rd-level psionic power. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  METALLINE Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) The color and texture of this weapon seem to shift with each passing moment. When you activate a metalline weapon, you can change its composition to adamantine, alchemical silver, cold iron, or ordinary steel. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fabricate. Cost to Create: Varies.  This weapon has a twisted haft or grip and spikes along its blade, head, or point.  38  620_10762_Chp2.indd 38  12/21/06 5:23:01 AM  MIGHTY SMITING  MINDFEEDER Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) necromancy Activation: —  This weapon feels heavier than a normal weapon of its type. Inscribed on its surface is a message affirming its superiority over some category of creature.  Composed of a flat, rough, slate-gray crystal, this weapon seems to absorb your thoughts.  MINDCRUSHER Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: — This red-tinted weapon seems to draw light and feeling from around it. You sense its hunger. Any psionic creature struck in combat by a mindcrusher weapon loses a number of power points equal to half the amount of hit point damage the weapon deals on that strike. Only the base damage of the weapon contributes to the power point loss; additional damage from high Strength or other sources does not cause additional power point loss. A creature with no power points, including any nonpsionic creature, must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or take 1 point of Wisdom damage. A projectile weapon bestows this property upon its ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch or psychic vampire (EPH 127). Cost to Create: Varies.  MORPHING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee or thrown weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Standard This weapon’s shape constantly flows and reforms in slightly different compositions. You can reshape a morphing weapon into any other melee or thrown weapon of the same size and type (light, one-handed, or two-handed). For instance, a morphing greatsword could become a spear, greataxe, or dire flail. If a single weapon created with the morphing property becomes a double weapon, only one end of the double weapon retains the weapon’s magical bonus, although the other end is masterwork. If a double weapon created with the morphing property becomes a single weapon, it can have the properties of either end of the original double weapon. The proper-  Price: +3 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — This weapon has a golden sheen and a series of black runes inlaid in jet along its length. Its pommel or grip is set with a black star sapphire.  WEAPONS  If you have a smite ability (smite, smite evil, smite shadowlands, or the like), you gain an extra +2 bonus on your smite attack rolls and damage rolls. In addition, you gain one additional use of your smite ability each day while wielding this weapon. If you have more than one smite ability, you must choose which one gains the extra use. A weapon of mighty smiting only grants one extra smite per day, regardless of how many characters wield it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, divine power. Cost to Create: Varies.  When you score a critical hit with a mindfeeder weapon, you gain 1 temporary power point for every 5 points of damage dealt by the critical hit. These temporary power points last for up to 1 minute. You gain power points even if the target has none. As with temporary hit points, temporary power points do not stack with each other; they overlap. Thus, if the wielder of a mindfeeder weapon successfully scores a critical hit while still enjoying temporary power points from a previous critical hit, the wielder gains only the higher of the two values: either her current number of temporary power points, or the new influx of temporary power points, whichever is greater. Creatures immune to extra damage from critical hits do not trigger mindfeeder weapons. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch or psychic vampire (EPH 127). Cost to Create: Varies.  NECROTIC FOCUS CHAPTER 2  Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: —  ties of the other end are dormant but not lost; they become active again when the morphing weapon once again becomes a double weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fabricate. Cost to Create: Varies.  A necrotic focus weapon serves as a channel for your ability drain or energy drain supernatural ability. While wielding it, you deal ability drain or bestow negative levels through it as if attacking with your natural weapons. If a saving throw against the effect is allowed, add the weapon’s enhancement bonus to the save DC. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, enervation, spectral hand. Cost to Create: Varies.  PARALYTIC BURST Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: — This weapon appears unusually straight and stiff. Set into the base of its blade or head is a smoothly polished piece of aventurine that seems to glow with an energy all its own. Whenever you score a critical hit with this weapon, a wave of green energy washes over the target, paralyzing it for 1 round (Will DC 17 negates). This effect activates even if the target is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, hold monster. Cost to Create: Varies.  PARALYZING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) enchantment Activation: Swift (command)  39  620_10762_Chp2.indd 39  12/21/06 5:23:02 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  This weapon bears a number of hard-to-see parallel striations near its handle. When a paralyzing weapon is activated, the next creature struck by the weapon must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or be paralyzed. Each round on its turn, the target can attempt a new saving throw to end the effect; otherwise, the paralysis lasts for 10 rounds. A paralyzing weapon functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, hold monster. Cost to Create: Varies.  PARRYING Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) enchantment Activation: — The detailed engravings on this shiny weapon appear to spin and jump about. Even when grasped, it twitches and bucks. A parrying weapon allows you to discern events an instant into the future, granting you a +1 insight bonus to AC. The weapon makes you so adept at parrying that it grants you a +1 insight bonus on saving throws. The bonuses are granted whenever you hold the weapon, even if you are flat-footed. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, divine protection (SC 70) or defensive precognition (EPH 124). Cost to Create: Varies.  POWER STORING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Free (command) This weapon is composed of a white, honeycomb substance of substantial weight. A power storing weapon allows a manifester to store a single targeted power of up to 5 power points in the weapon. (The power must have a manifesting time of 1 standard action.) Any time the weapon strikes a creature and the creature takes damage from it, the weapon can manifest the power on that creature if you desire. Once the power is manifested, the weapon is empty, and a manifester can store any other targeted power of up to 5 power points into it. The weapon  telepathically whispers to you the name of the power currently stored within it. A randomly generated power storing weapon has a 50% chance to have a power stored in it already. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, manifester level 12th. Cost to Create: Varies.  PRECISE Price: +1 bonus Property: Ranged weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — This weapon has a carved peephole or sighting tube worked into its design, and its hilt is set with a faceted diamond. You can shoot or throw a precise weapon at an opponent engaged in melee without incurring the standard –4 penalty. This benefit does not apply if you already have the Precise Shot feat. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Precise Shot. Cost to Create: Varies.  PRISMATIC BURST Price: +30,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: — This smoothly polished weapon is set with a ruby, a fire opal, a yellow topaz, an emerald, a blue topaz, a sapphire, and an amethyst. Whenever you score a successful critical hit with this weapon, multicolored light springs from the gems and cascades along its blade or head, subjecting the target to a prismatic spray effect (save DC 20; see spell description, PH 264). This effect activates even if the target is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, prismatic spray. Cost to Create: Varies.  PROFANE Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: Standard (command)  By speaking the appropriate command word, you can sheathe a profane weapon in crackling black negative energy. If you have no Constitution score, this energy does not harm you; otherwise you take 1 point of Constitution damage for each round that you hold the weapon while the effect is activated. This effect lasts until you speak another command word to end it. While activated, a profane weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage to any living target (or 2d6 points against a good outsider) on a successful hit. Also, it is treated as evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, inflict light wounds. Cost to Create: Varies.  PROFANE BURST [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: Standard (command) and — Synergy Prerequisite: Profane This black iron weapon is decorated with dozens of silver skulls. Runic phrases describing vile acts run along its blade or haft and glow when it is wielded. A profane burst weapon functions as a profane weapon (see above). In addition, the weapon explodes with negative energy on a successful critical hit, dealing extra negative energy damage as set out in the table below. (This effect activates even if the target is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits.) A profane burst weapon deals even more damage to good outsiders on a successful critical hit. This burst does not harm you or any creature other than the target if you are undead; otherwise, you take 1d4 points of Constitution damage (or Charisma damage if you have no Constitution score). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Even if the weapon has not been activated to deal extra damage because of the profane property, the weapon still deals its extra negative energy damage on a successful critical hit.  This black iron weapon is decorated with a single silver skull. A runic phrase describing a vile act runs along its blade or haft.  40  620_10762_Chp2.indd 40  12/21/06 5:23:04 AM  Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Damage 1d10 2d10 3d10  Good Outsider Extra Damage 2d10 4d10 6d10  Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) divination Activation: — This extraordinary weapon is shot through with translucent purple crystal shards. You detect a vague air of menace about it. A psibane weapon is crafted to oppose psionic beings. When used against any creature that has the psionic subtype (EPH 183), its effective enhancement bonus is 2 higher than its actual enhancement bonus (so a +1 psibane longsword instead has a +3 enhancement bonus against psionic foes). It deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against psionic opponents. A psibane weapon bestows one negative level on any psionic creature attempting to wield it. This negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when the weapon is no longer wielded. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way while the weapon is wielded. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dispel magic or bend reality (EPH 80). Cost to Create: Varies.  PSYCHIC Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) no school Activation: — This weapon has an inner glow of varying brightness. It glows more brightly when brought near those with psionic ability. A psychic weapon’s power depends on its wielder. It gains an enhancement bonus  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, wish or reality revision (EPH 128). Cost to Create: Varies.  PSYCHOKINETIC Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Standard (command) This silvery-white weapon has a smooth sheen and is difficult to grip tightly. Upon command, a psychokinetic weapon glows from the inside with lethal psionic energy. Such a weapon deals an extra 1d4 points of force damage on a successful hit. This extra damage is not affected by damage reduction, and it affects incorporeal creatures even if the attack would normally miss due to the incorporeal miss chance. The energy does not harm you while wielding the weapon. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blast of force (SC 31) or concussive blast (EPH 85). Cost to Create: Varies.  PSYCHOKINETIC BURST [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Standard (command) and — Synergy Prerequisite: Psychokinetic  This weapon functions as a pschokinetic weapon (see above). In addition, the weapon releases a blast of destructive psionic energy on a successful critical hit, dealing extra force damage as set out in the table below. (This effect activates even if the target is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits.) This burst does not harm you or any creature other than the target. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Even if the weapon has not been activated to deal extra damage because of the psychokinetic property, the weapon still deals its extra force damage on a successful critical hit. Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  WEAPONS  PSIBANE  Power Point Enhancement Reserve Bonus 0* +1 1–29 +2 30–79 +3 80–129 +4 130 or higher +5 *Includes any wielder without power points.  Silvery-black and potent, this weapon is very smooth and difficult to grip tightly.  CHAPTER 2  Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, inflict critical wounds. Cost to Create: Varies.  based on the wielder’s current power point reserve, as shown on the table below. (This benefit doesn’t stack with the weapon’s normal enhancement bonus.) The weapon’s enhancement bonus decreases (to a minimum of +1) as the wielder spends power points, and it increases whenever the wielder gains enough power points (by any means) to put his power point reserve into the next higher category.  Extra Force Damage 1d6 2d6 3d6  This extra damage is not affected by damage reduction, and it affects incorporeal creatures even if the attack would normally miss due to the incorporeal miss chance. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blast of force (SC 31) or concussive blast (EPH 85). Cost to Create: Varies.  QUICK LOADING Price: +1 bonus Property: Crossbow Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Free (manipulation) or move (manipulation); see text Volleys of soaring bolts are engraved upon this loaded crossbow. A quick loading crossbow accesses an extradimensional space that can hold up to 100 bolts, allowing you to reload the crossbow more rapidly than normal. Reloading a quick loading hand or light crossbow is a free action (allowing a character with multiple attacks to use his full attack rate), and reloading a quick loading heavy crossbow is a move action. Different types of bolts can be held in the extradimensional space, and you can select freely from these when reloading the crossbow. Adding or removing a bolt  41  620_10762_Chp2.indd 41  12/21/06 5:23:05 AM  by hand from an extradimensional space requires a move (manipulation) action. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Leomund’s secret chest, shrink item. Cost to Create: Varies.  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  RESOUNDING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: — This weapon bears a small engraving of a bell. A resounding weapon emits a deep, ringing chime each time it successfully hits a target. The sound carries over the din of battle, encouraging your allies. When you strike a foe with a resounding weapon, allies (including you) within 30 feet gain a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls and saves against fear effects for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bless. Cost to Create: Varies.  REVEALING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — A sea of flames flickers upon this weapon, though it is perfectly cool to the touch. Any opponent struck by a weapon that has this property is outlined in magical flames, as the faerie fire spell, for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, faerie fire. Cost to Create: Varies.  SACRED Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) This silver-white weapon is decorated with a single golden sun. A runic phrase describing a heroic deed runs along its blade or haft. By speaking the appropriate command word, you can sheathe a sacred weapon in luminous positive energy. If you are not undead, this energy does not harm you; otherwise, you take 1 point of Charisma damage for each round that you hold the  weapon. This effect lasts until you speak another command word to end it. While activated, a sacred weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage to any undead target (or 2d6 points against an evil outsider) on a successful hit. Also, it is treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cure light wounds. Cost to Create: Varies.  SACRED BURST [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Sacred This silver-white weapon is decorated with dozens of golden sun motifs. Runic phrases describing various heroic deeds run along its blade or haft and glow when it is wielded. A sacred burst weapon functions as a sacred weapon (see above). In addition, the weapon explodes with positive energy on a successful critical hit, dealing extra positive energy damage to creatures as set out in the table below. (This effect activates even if the target is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits.) A sacred burst weapon deals even more damage to evil outsiders on a successful critical hit. This burst does not harm you or any creature other than the target unless you are undead; if you are, you take 1d4 points of Charisma damage from the burst. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Even if the weapon has not been activated to deal extra damage because of the sacred property, the weapon still deals its extra positive energy damage on a successful critical hit. Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Damage 1d10 2d10 3d10  Evil Outsider Damage 2d10 4d10 6d10  Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cure critical wounds. Cost to Create: Varies.  SCREAMING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Standard (command) This weapon is pierced with numerous tiny holes in a decorative pattern. These holes produce a whistling sound when air moves through them. Upon command, this weapon begins to vibrate gently, though it emits no actual sound in this mode. Whenever an activated screaming weapon hits, it produces a high-pitched sound and deals an extra 1d4 points of sonic damage to the target. This noise is unpleasant, but it has no adverse effect upon any creatures other than the one struck. The ability of a screaming weapon to deal extra sonic damage is negated in any area of magical silence. Screaming weapons have no additional adverse effect on creatures with unusually acute hearing, although such creatures tend to dislike them. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shout or sound burst. Cost to Create: Varies.  SCREAMING BURST [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Screaming This weapon is decorated with engravings of bells, cymbals, drums, and other images associated with loud noises. A screaming burst weapon functions as a screaming weapon (see above). In addition, the weapon explodes with sonic energy on a successful critical hit, dealing extra sonic damage as set out in the table below. (This effect activates even if the target is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits.) This burst does not harm you or any creature other than the target. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Even if the weapon has not been activated to deal extra damage because of the screaming property, the weapon still deals its extra sonic damage on a successful critical hit.  42  620_10762_Chp2.indd 42  12/21/06 5:23:07 AM  Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Extra Sonic Damage 1d8 2d8 3d8  Price: +5,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) illusion Activation: Swift (mental) This weapon is made of a dull black material, and its edges seem indistinct. A shadowstrike weapon can reach through your own shadow to catch foes off guard. Once per day, you can activate the property to add 5 feet to the weapon’s reach for a single attack. The target is denied its Dexterity bonus to AC for this attack. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shadow conjuration. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  SHATTERMANTLE Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — Translucent, writhing energy and blue sparks can be seen raging within this weapon. A shattermantle weapon damages a foe’s spell resistance. Each time the weapon strikes a foe that has spell resistance, the value of that spell resistance is reduced by 2 for 1 round. The penalties for multiple hits during the same round stack. For example, if you succeed on three attacks in the same round against the same foe, that foe’s spell resistance is reduced by 6 until the beginning of your next turn. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, assay spell resistance (SC 17). Cost to Create: Varies.  SHIELDING Price: +1 bonus Property: Light melee weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (command)  SIZING Price: +5,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) This weapon features a series of decorative nubs on the hilt or haft. Activating a sizing weapon changes its size category to any other that you desire. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  SLOW BURST Price: +5,000 gp Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — This weapon has an image of a snail worked into its hilt or grip, and it feels cold to the touch. A chill aura numbs this weapon’s victim when you strike true. Whenever you score a critical hit with this weapon, the target is slowed (as the slow spell) for 3 rounds (Will DC 14 negates). This effect activates even if the creature struck is not normally subject to extra damage from critical hits. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, slow. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  SOULBOUND Price (Item Level): +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Swift (mental)  WEAPONS  SHADOWSTRIKE  A shielding weapon is most often employed as an off-hand weapon. Activating a shielding weapon transforms it into a heavy steel shield, with the same enhancement bonus as the weapon itself (both for AC and when making shield bash attacks). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate objects, shield. Cost to Create: Varies.  A soulbound weapon serves as a receptacle for your essentia, much as a soulmeld does. Every point of essentia invested in the weapon increases its enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls by 1, up to a maximum enhancement bonus of +3. Each soulbound weapon has an essentia capacity. The maximum number of essentia points that can be invested in it equals this value or your normal essentia capacity (see Table 2–1: Essentia Capacity, Magic of Incarnum 19), whichever is lower. A soulbound weapon has a maximum essentia capacity of 2. Chakra Bind: A soulbound weapon grants bonuses when it is bound to a chakra, as described below. These effects function continuously, with no need for activation. See Binding Items to Chakras (MoI 108) for more information. Arms: Binding a soulbound weapon to your arms chakra grants you a +2 insight bonus on rolls made to confirm critical hits with the weapon. Brow: Binding a soulbound weapon to your brow chakra allows you, if you miss an attack because of concealment, to reroll your miss chance percentile roll one time to see if you actually hit. This benefit is usable once per round. Hands: Binding a soulbound weapon to your hands chakra grants you a +2 insight bonus on initiative checks while the weapon is held. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic weapon, essentia pool 2. Cost to Create: Varies.  CHAPTER 2  Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shout or sound burst. Cost to Create: Varies.  The handle of this weapon has a handguard shaped like a shield.  SOULBOUND, GREATER [SYNERGY] Price (Item Level): +2 bonus Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) abjuration This entire weapon seems composed of some blue material, and it moves through the air effortlessly. This property functions as the soulbound property (see above), except a greater soulbound weapon has a maximum essentia capacity of 4 (instead of 2), for a maximum enhancement bonus of +5 (instead of +3). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic weapon, essentia pool 4.  This looks like a normal item of its kind except for a faint, blue sheen.  43  620_10762_Chp2.indd 43  12/21/06 5:23:09 AM  SOULBREAKER [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) necromancy Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Enervating  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Shrouded by motes of darkness, this weapon is the color of a deep bruise.  Illus. by W. England  This weapon functions as an enervating weapon (see page 34). However, a negative level gained from an attack from a soulbreaker weapon doesn’t fade 1 hour later. Instead, 24 hours after being struck, if the negative level or levels have not been purged, the subject must succeed on a DC 18 Fortitude save for each negative level or lose a character level. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, energy drain. Cost to Create: Varies.  SOULDRINKING [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Enervating A barely perceptible shadow, in the shape of a screaming humanoid face, seems to flicker on this weapon. This weapon functions as an enervating weapon (see page 34). In addition, when a souldrinking weapon scores a critical hit on a living creature, it grants you 5 temporary hit points and a +2 morale bonus on melee damage rolls. The temporary hit points don’t stack with temporary hit points from any other source. This effect fades after 10 minutes. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: Varies.  SPELLSTRIKE Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: Free (mental) The image of a great helm ornaments the end of this hefty, unusually solid weapon.  44  620_10762_Chp2.indd 44  A spellstrike weapon allows you to transfer some or all of the weapon’s enhancement bonus, using it as a bonus on your saving throws against spells or spell-like abilities. As a free action, you choose how to allocate the weapon’s enhancement bonus at the start of your turn before using the weapon, and the effect on saving throws lasts until the start of your next turn. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, resistance. Cost to Create: Varies.  STUNNING [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: — Synergy Prerequisite: Screaming The surface of this weapon is covered with jagged lines resembling lightning bolts. A stunning weapon functions as a screaming weapon (see page 42). In addition, on a successful critical hit with a stunning weapon, the target must succeed on a DC 17 Fortitude save or be stunned for 1 round. Projectile weapons bestow this property on their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, hold monster. Cost to Create: Varies.  STUNNING SURGE Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Swift (command) This weapon is broad and heavy compared to other weapons of its kind. Its rough but solid craftsmanship bespeaks straightforward functionality. On a successful melee attack, you can command this weapon to emit a surge of magical energy. Unless the target succeeds on a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your character level + your Cha modifier), it is stunned for 1 round. This ability is usable a number of times per day equal to 1+ your Charisma bonus (if any). Once you  activate this ability, it can’t be activated by any other creature until the following day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, hold monster. Cost to Create: Varies.  STYGIAN Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: Swift (mental) This weapon is composed of a black crystal that seems to absorb the light around it. When you activate a stygian weapon, the next successful attack you make before the end of your turn bestows one negative level on the target in addition to dealing normal damage. This negative level lasts for 10 minutes, and thus can’t result in a permanent level decrease. A stygian weapon functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, enervation. Cost to Create: Varies.  SUNDERING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Decorated with sculpted, imposing fists, this item seems denser than normal. A sundering weapon allows you to attack as if you have the Improved Sunder feat, and it deals an extra 1d6 points of damage on a sunder attempt. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Improved Sunder, weapon of impact (SC 237) or metaphysical weapon (EPH 118). Cost to Create: Varies.  SWEEPING Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: —  +1 sundering warhammer  12/21/06 5:23:10 AM  Images of clouds and gusting wind cover this strangely flexible weapon. This property grants you a +2 competence bonus on any Strength check made to trip an opponent with the weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: Varies.  This weapon appears to have been hewn from crystal. Its grip is inlaid with gems in a circular design. A terran weapon automatically overcomes the damage reduction of any creature that has the air subtype. In addition, the weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against such targets. A terran weapon also bestows one negative level on any creature that has the air subtype and attempts to wield it. The negative level remains as long as the weapon is in hand and disappears when it is no longer held. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the weapon is wielded. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, earth subtype. Cost to Create: Varies.  TRANSMUTING Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — This odd-looking weapon has both sharp and blunt sections. Its pommel or grip is set with a diamond, a piece of jet, a sapphire, and a ruby. In addition, it is inlaid with both adamantine and silver. When you score a successful hit with a transmuting weapon against a creature that has damage reduction, that attack is resolved normally. At the start of your next turn, however, the weapon transforms, taking on the properties required to overcome that creature’s damage reduction.  UNHOLY SURGE [SYNERGY] Price: +1 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — and swift (command) Synergy Prerequisite: Unholy This vile weapon is decorated with jagged spikes, skulls, and other macabre designs. Characters who serve gods of murder, strife, and other base deeds craft these weapons of pure evil for themselves and for others who share their foul desires. This weapon functions as an unholy weapon (DMG 226). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, on a successful melee attack with an unholy surge weapon, you can command it to emit a burst of unholy energy, which deals an extra 3d6 points of damage to a good-aligned target. If used against a non-good creature, it deals no additional damage, and that use of the ability is wasted. This ability is usable a number of times per day equal to 1 + your Cha bonus (if any). Once you activate this property, it can’t be activated by any other creature until the following day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, unholy blight or unholy word. Cost to Create: Varies.  VAMPIRIC  A vampiric weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage to any living creature it hits, and you heal damage equal to this amount. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: Varies.  VANISHING  WEAPONS  Price: +2 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: —  A gaping maw with elongated incisors adorns this weapon. The fangs shimmer wetly.  CHAPTER 2  TERRAN  Once so changed, the weapon overcomes the designated type of damage reduction for 10 rounds, or until you strike a creature that has a different type of damage reduction. In this case, the weapon transforms in the same manner to overcome that damage reduction instead. If the target has multiple types of damage reduction, the weapon overcomes all of them. If the creature gains a new type of damage reduction after initially being struck (from changing its form, for example), the weapon must change again before it can overcome the new type. A transmuting weapon does not gain any other benefit of the properties it takes on, and it always deals normal damage. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fabricate. Cost to Create: Varies.  Price: +8,000 gp Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) The grip of this weapon is transparent, and its pommel or guard is set with white diamonds. A vanishing weapon allows you to travel short distances instantaneously. Once per day, after a successful melee attack, you can transport yourself and any equipment you are carrying to any spot within 60 feet by activating the weapon. This movement otherwise conforms to the limitations given for the dimension door spell (PH 221). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dimension door. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  VENOMOUS Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) A carved snake coils around much of this weapon, its body tensed to strike. When activated, a venomous weapon coats itself in injury poison (Fort DC 14, 1d4 Str/1d4 Str), which lasts for 1 minute or until your next successful attack with the weapon, whichever comes first. A venomous weapon functions three times per day. Projectile weapons bestow this property on their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, poison. Cost to Create: Varies.  Price: +2 bonus Property: Melee weapon Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: —  45  620_10762_Chp2.indd 45  12/21/06 5:23:14 AM  WARNING Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Four glass eyes circle this weapon, each watching a different direction.  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  A warning weapon grants you a +5 insight bonus on initiative checks as long as it is held. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: Varies.  WEAKENING  Illus. by D. Martin  Price: +1 bonus Property: Weapon Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Macabre ornamentation and stretched bits of leather make this weapon look as though it were made from a shriveled limb. When you score a critical hit with a weakening weapon, the target takes a –4 penalty to its Strength score (to a minimum score of 1) for 10 minutes. Multiple strikes aren’t cumulative. Projectile weapons bestow this property upon their ammunition. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, ray of enfeeblement. Cost to Create: Varies.  WHIRLING Price: +1 bonus Property: Slashing melee weapon Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Full-round (mental) The hilt of this weapon is twisted into a corkscrew design, and its blade is dramatically curved. Three times per day, you can use this weapon to make a whirling attack that has a chance of striking all nearby opponents. Instead of making your regular attacks, you instead make one melee attack at your full attack bonus against each opponent within reach of the weapon. This property otherwise functions like the Whirlwind Attack feat. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, haste. Cost to Create: Varies.  SPECIFIC WEAPONS  The following weapons are usually constructed with the properties described here. You can increase the enhancement bonus of these weapons or add more special properties just as you would for any other item. The items in this section are arranged alphabetically.  ARROW OF BITING Price (Item Level): 506 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — (ammunition) Weight: — This long arrow features alternating bands of red, yellow, and black, similar to the markings of a poisonous serpent. Instead of an arrowhead, the fang of a gigantic snake is fastened to its tip. This +1 arrow injects any creature it strikes with poison (injury, Fort DC 16, 1d6 Con/1d6 Con). An arrow of biting can also be created as a crossbow bolt for the same price. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, poison. Cost to Create: 250 gp (plus 6 gp for masterwork arrow), 20 XP, 1 day.  ASSASSIN WHIP Price (Item Level): 5,301 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 1 lb. Although this seems to be nothing more than a tangled, long-leafed vine, one end has been knotted into a sturdy handle like that of a whip.  Twice per day, you can activate this +1 whip after successfully hitting a Medium or smaller target that is standing on the ground. Doing this causes tendrils of vegetation to spring forth from the ground, entangling the target and dealing 2d6 points of damage per round. This effect lasts for 3 rounds or until the affected creature escapes from the tendrils (a DC 20 Strength check or DC 20 Escape Artist check made as a full-round action). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, entangle. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 301 gp for masterwork whip), 200 XP, 5 days.  AXE OF ANCESTRAL VIRTUE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 8,530 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 8 lb. A holy symbol of Moradin decorates the joint between the head and the haft of this sturdy adamantine waraxe. When you wield an axe of ancestral virtue, it functions as a +1 keen adamantine dwarven waraxe if you are lawful good, lawful neutral, or neutral good. Prized by the faithful of the Soul Forger, these weapons have long been used in the defense of dwarf holdings. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, an axe of ancestral virtue reveals its intelligence and sentience (AL LN; Int 10, Wis 17, Cha 17; speech, telepathy, darkvision 120 ft., hearing; Ego score 17). In addition, the axe can use bless, cure moderate wounds (wielder only), and faerie fire, each three times per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Moradin and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. If you sacrifice a  Arrow of biting  46  620_10762_Chp2.indd 46  12/21/06 5:23:16 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, bless, cure moderate wounds, faerie fire, haste, keen edge. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 3,030 gp for adamantine dwarven waraxe), 200 XP, 5 days.  WEAPONS  Price (Item Level): 10,320 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 12 lb.  CHAPTER 2  AXE OF THE SEA REAVERS  axe’s haft. You and all allies within 15 feet of you gain a +2 morale bonus on attack rolls, weapon damage, saves, skill checks, and ability checks for 1 round. In addition, you can speak a command word engraved upon the blade. All enemies within 15 feet of you become panicked for 1 round (Will DC 16 negates). Each of these abilities is usable once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fear, heroism. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork greataxe), 400 XP, 10 days.  BLADED CROSSBOW Price (Item Level): 4,660 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — Weight: 12 lb.  The blade of this large greataxe looks like the curved tail fin of some great fish, and the haft is sculpted to look like a long series of complex sailor’s knots. The axe smells of brine. This +1 greataxe allows you to float atop the water, no matter your weight. This effect functions continuously and requires no activation. You can also activate an axe of the sea reavers to access two additional abilities. You can utter a war cry engraved into the  The front of this heavy crossbow is fitted with a pair of curved, sharp blades. The gap between them is perfectly positioned to allow the unhindered passage of a crossbow bolt. This crossbow has an exceptionally strong stock, which is shaped so that you can grip and swing it as a melee weapon. You can use a bladed crossbow as either a +1 heavy crossbow for ranged attacks, or as a +1 battleaxe for melee attacks.  Illus. by D. Grifﬁth & B. Trott  7th-level divine slot (or have the True Believer feat and at least 13 HD), the weapon can also use haste (wielder only) three times per day. Lore: Untold Axe of years ago, one of ancestral Moradin’s high priests virtue volunteered to be bound into the original axe of ancestral virtue so that the weapon would have both intelligence and the virtuous nature to serve Moradin well. This priest’s personality has been duplicated into the few copies of the weapon that have been forged since. The weapon has never revealed the priest’s original name to any user, but judging from the fact that the axe constantly urges its wielder to attack the ancient enemies of the dwarves (goblinoids and giants), he must have been a fierce warrior indeed. The weapon takes great delight in “illuminating targets” (faerie fire), “salving honor-wounds” (cure moderate wounds), and granting “godspeed” (haste). The axe also judges its wielders on how well they adhere to traditional dwarf culture, and it rebels mightily against nondwarves who so much as pick it up (Knowledge [religion] DC 20).  Assassin whip  Axe of the sea reavers Crystal echoblade  Blazing skylance  47  620_10762_Chp2.indd 47  12/21/06 5:23:18 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blade barrier. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 660 gp for masterwork heavy crossbow and masterwork battleaxe), 80 XP, 4 days.  BLAZING SKYLANCE  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Price (Item Level): 8,310 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 10 lb.  Illus. by W. England & C. Critchlow  Red and orange flames lick the length of this silver lance. The haft is wrapped in strips of red scaled leather. Three times per day, you can command this +1 lance to fire a 15-foot cone of searing flames from its tip, dealing 5d4 points of fire damage to targets within the cone’s area (Reflex DC 13 half). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, burning hands. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 310 gp for masterwork lance), 320 XP, 8 days.  BOW OF SONGS Price (Item Level): 12,330 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Bow of the Activation: Swift wintermoon (command) Weight: 2 lb. This bow is made of fine wood and appears to be of elven design. This +1 shortbow blends music with every shot to deadly effect. On your turn, you can expend one daily use of your bardic music ability to gain a bonus equal to your Charisma bonus on the next attack roll and (if your attack hits) on the corresponding damage roll that you make with the bow. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, sculpt sound, elf, bardic music. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 330 gp for masterwork shortbow), 480 XP, 12 days.  BOW OF THE WINTERMOON [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 3,400 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. This elegant composite longbow is carved of rowan and inlaid with silver tracery in an elven design. Its tips are shod with silver, and its grip is wound with blue metal wire. When you wield this bow, it functions as a +1 composite longbow if you are chaotic good, neutral good, or chaotic neutral. It adjusts its pull automatically, allowing you to add your full Strength bonus to your damage roll with each arrow fired. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, this bow gains the frost and drow bane weapon properties (DMG 224). To use the relic power, you must worship Corellon Larethian and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Corellon Larethian gave the original bow of the wintermoon to the elf hero Seskaya more than two thousand years ago, but his clerics have since made several copies (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, ice storm, summon monster I. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp (plus 400 gp for masterwork composite longbow), 120 XP, 3 days.  BOWSTAFF Price (Item Level): 4,600 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 4 lb. This thin, flexible quarterstaff has a bulge in the center and tapered tips. By activating a bowstaff, you can change this +1/masterwork quarterstaff into a +1 longbow or back again. Each version performs like a regular magic weapon of its kind. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, polymorph any object.  Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 600 gp for masterwork quarterstaff), 160 XP, 4 days.  CHAIN OF OBEISANCE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 20,400 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) enchantment Activation: — Weight: 12 lb. This spiked chain is forged of thick metal bands interspersed with long, sharp dagger points. Followers of Hextor prize these grisly weapons for keeping their prisoners subdued. A chain of obeisance functions as a +1 unholy spiked chain if you are lawful evil, neutral evil, or lawful neutral.  Chain of obeisance  Relic Power: Despite its size and apparent unwieldiness, if you have established the proper divine connection, you can wield this weapon in a grapple as if it were a light weapon. If you pin your opponent while wielding a chain of obeisance, the foe must succeed on a DC 22 Will save or be dominated as by the dominate monster spell. No more than one creature can be dominated at a time; if you use this power on a second creature, the first effect ends. To use the relic power, you must worship Hextor and either sacrifice a 7th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 13 HD. Lore: These weapons are forged from the shackles in Hextor’s hellish prisonfortress. The first of them were used by the strongest warriors in Hextor’s horde to subdue prisoners taken on the battlefields  48  620_10762_Chp2.indd 48  12/21/06 5:23:24 AM  [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 12,308 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  When you wield a chromatic rod, it functions as a +1 morningstar with the corrosive, frost, flaming, or shock property if you are chaotic evil, neutral evil, or chaotic neutral. You can select or change the property by speaking the command word, but it can have no more than one such property at a time. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can also use the chromatic rod’s spell-like abilities, as given on the table below. Each is usable once per day. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 308 gp for masterwork morningstar), 480 XP, 12 days. Spell Slot Spell-Like Abilities Level/HD Gained 5th/9 Wall of ice (300-ft. range, covering up to twenty 10-foot squares) Insect plague (1,200-ft. range, creating six adjacent swarms) 7th/13 Dominate person (75-ft. range, Will DC 20 negates) Find the path (duration 200 minutes) Veil (Will DC 21)  Price (Item Level): 4,310 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — Weight: 4 lb. This longsword’s blade is crafted from jagged violet crystal. When you hold it close to your ear, you hear a faint hum. A crystal echoblade normally functions as a +1 longsword, but is enhanced by your musical ability. If you use your bardic music ability while wielding the weapon, the blade resonates in harmony, dealing additional sonic damage on each attack equal to half your bard level. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bardic music. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 310 gp for masterwork longsword), 160 XP, 4 days.  CUDGEL THAT NEVER FORGETS [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 20,312 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: —; see text Weight: 8 lb.  This weapon was created to aid the followers of St. Cuthbert in exacting just retribution for wrongful acts. When you wield a cudgel that never forgets, it functions as a +1 axiomatic heavy mace if you are lawful neutral, lawful good, or neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, this weapon reveals its intelligence and sentience (AL LN; Int 16, Wis 10, Cha 16; speech [Abyssal, Celestial, Common, and Infernal], darkvision 60 ft., hearing, Intimidate 10 ranks for a total modifier of +13). In addition, the mace can produce a cure moderate wounds effect three times per day. To use the relic power, you must worship St. Cuthbert and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. If you sacrifice a 7th-level divine slot (or you have the True Believer feat and at least 13 HD), the cudgel also remembers which foes have struck you and deals extra damage to them in retribution thereafter. If an enemy hits you with a weapon (including a natural weapon), the cudgel thereafter has an enhancement bonus 2 higher than normal against that foe. It also deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against that foe. No disguise or shapechanging ability can guard against this ability. A cudgel that never forgets speaks little except during combat, during which it reminds you in stentorian tones about the transgressions of each enemy, whether it has witnessed them personally (“That bugbear hath wounded Lidda most grievously”) or simply assumed wrongdoing based on creature type (“That succubus hath surely tempted many good men toward evil”). The imprecations of a cudgel that never forgets count as an attempt to demoralize an opponent with the Intimidate skill (PH 76). Unless it’s healing you, a cudgel attempts to demoralize an opponent every round during your turn. Lore: The first cudgel that never forgets was crafted by a master  Cudgel that never forgets  620_10762_Chp2.indd 49  Illus. by W. Reynolds & W. England  This iron-shod rod is crowned with five dragon heads—one each of black, blue, green, red, and white. The heads all face outward, their jaws parted as if to breathe.  CRYSTAL ECHOBLADE  This heavy mace has a flanged iron head and a thick wooden shaft wrapped in leather cord. At its base is an intricately carved metal representation of a stern, bearded face.  WEAPONS  CHROMATIC ROD  To use these spelllike abilities, you must worship Tiamat and either sacrifice a divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and a certain number of Hit Dice. The spell slot level and Hit Dice required are given for each entry in the table. Lore: The first chromatic rod was forged in hellfire by the five consorts of Tiamat as a gift for their queen (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, Sanctify Relic, dominate person, find the path, insect plague, veil, wall of ice.  CHAPTER 2  of the Outer Planes (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, dominate monster. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp (plus Chromatic 400 gp for masrod terwork spiked chain), 800 XP, 20 days.  49  12/21/06 5:23:28 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  weaponsmith whose city was plagued by shapeshifters that attacked citizens, then disappeared into crowds. A select group of city guards, armed with the cudgels, quickly sorted out the guilty from the innocent and restored order to the city. Thereafter, the cudgels were donated to the Church of St. Cuthbert (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, cure moderate wounds, true seeing. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp (plus 312 gp for masterwork heavy mace), 800 XP, 20 days.  DAGGER OF DEFIANCE Price (Item Level): 6,302 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by D. Grifﬁth  This ornate dagger seems light, almost fragile, with its stylized porcelain hilt. Its blade is long and thin, like a tiny rapier. This +1 dagger grants you a +3 resistance bonus on saves against enchantment and fear effects. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, remove fear. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork dagger), 240 XP, 6 days.  DAGGER OF DENIAL [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 20,302 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: —; see text Weight: 1 lb. This black-bladed dagger has a wavy blade and a hilt set with a chunk of fool’s gold. When you wield this weapon, it functions as a +1 unholy dagger. Unlike most relics, a dagger of Dagger of denial functions for a wielder of denial any alignment, and it retains its sentience and basic relic powers even if you don’t establish the proper divine connection, though it will not reveal its intelligence to you or use any relic powers on your behalf. However, if you aren’t neutral, lawful evil, neutral  evil, or chaotic evil, the dagger betrays you at the fi rst available opportunity. A dagger of denial starts working against you by surreptitiously dispelling your spells and those of your allies, leaving you without the magic you depend on for battle. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a dagger of denial reveals its intelligence and sentience (AL NE; Int 18, Wis 10, Cha 18; speech, telepathy, darkvision 120 ft., blindsense, hearing, Intimidate 10 ranks for a total modifier of +13, Spellcraft 10 ranks for a total modifier of +14, Bluff 10 ranks for a total modifier of +14, Ego score 26). In addition, the dagger can use detect magic at will and greater dispel magic once per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Vecna and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD. If you sacrifice an 8th-level divine spell slot (or you have the True Believer feat and at least 15 HD), the dagger grants you a continuous detect scrying effect and can use arcane eye once per day. A dagger of denial takes great glee in disrupting other spellcasters. It giggles and cackles to you constantly when facing enemy spellcasters. It generally readies an action to counterspell such a foe’s spellcasting with greater dispel magic. Lore: The four daggers of denial known to exist were originally gifts from Vecna to the wizards he charged with keeping his priests in line (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, arcane eye, detect magic, detect scrying, greater dispel magic. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork dagger), 800 XP, 20 days.  DAWNSTAR [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 9,308 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This morningstar has a spiked adamantine head and a knob of the same metal bonded to the end of the haft. The junctures of the haft and the metal portions are decorated with glowing, cabochon-cut rubies. Created to help bring the light of goodness into places of the darkest evil, a dawnstar is a favorite of Pelor’s clergy. When you wield  a dawnstar, it functions as a +2 morningstar if you are lawful good, neutral good, chaotic good, or neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a dawnstar gains the brilliant energy property (DMG 224). Furthermore, if it is ever sundered or otherwise broken, it explodes, dealing 200 points of damage to every creature and object within 10 feet, 150 points of damage to all within 20 feet, and 100 points of damage to all within 30 feet. Each affected creature can attempt a DC 17 Reflex save to halve the damage. You are unharmed by the explosion. To use the relic power, you must worship Pelor and either sacrifice a 7th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 13 HD. Lore: Only four dawnstars are known to exist. They were originally gifts from Pelor to four solars who rescued one of his mortal paladins from Baator (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, sunburst. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 308 gp for masterwork morningstar), 360 XP, 9 days.  DEATH SPIKE Price (Item Level): 6,304 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: Free (command) Weight: 6 lb. This long, wrought iron spear is clearly capable of causing devastating wounds. Blackened ritual runes of death appear along its length. A death spike allows you to draw the life energy out of a dying target, granting you temporary vitality. It functions as a +1 cold iron spear, but whenever you reduce a living creature to –1 or fewer hit points on a melee attack with the spear, you can activate it to gain 1d8 temporary hit points and a +2 morale bonus on damage rolls. These benefits last for 1 hour; multiple uses of the spear don’t stack. The spear can be activated three times per day. If you also wear a magic item that grants a bonus to your Charisma score, you can add the item’s bonus to the temporary hit points granted by the spear. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, death knell, magic weapon. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 304 gp for masterwork cold iron spear, plus 2,000 gp for enhancing cold iron), 160 XP, 4 days.  50  620_10762_Chp2.indd 50  12/21/06 5:23:33 AM  Dagger of deﬁance  Gauntlet of Gruumsh  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  DWARF CRUSHER  Illus. by B. Trott & W. England  Death spike  Forceful skylance  EXPLOSIVE SLING  THE FIST  Price (Item Level): 9,010 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 8 lb.  Price (Item Level): 36,300 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) evocation Activation: — Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 7,005 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) evocation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: —  This enormous greatclub bears thick patches of rusted metal bracing a spiked stone weight set within the gnarled head.  This sling is made of leather that has been blackened by fire.  Thousands of black links make up this chainmail gauntlet, its knuckles ending in pitted, battle-worn spikes.  This Large +1 adamantine greatclub can only be activated by a bearer who has a Strength of 21 or higher and the Power Attack feat. When it is activated, the next attack you make with a dwarf crusher in that round against a dwarf, a construct, or a creature that has the earth subtype is treated as a touch attack. You must also take at least a –5 penalty on this attack roll using the Power Attack feat in order to gain this benefit. This effect functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength, giant. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 3,010 gp for Large adamantine greatclub), 240 XP, 6 days.  This +1 sling imbues stones launched from it with an explosive charge. When you hit a target with a stone fired from an explosive sling, the stone explodes, dealing an extra 2d6 points of fire damage to the target (no save). In addition, each other creature within 10 feet of the target creature when the stone explodes is engulfed in flame from the burst of fire and takes 2d6 points of fire damage (Reflex DC 22 negates). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fireball. Cost to Create: 18,000 gp (plus 300 gp for masterwork sling), 1,440 XP, 36 days.  Forged long ago by dwarf hands, the fist is a +1 adamantine spiked gauntlet. While wearing the gauntlet, you are protected  Dawnstar  51  620_10762_Chp2.indd 51  12/21/06 5:23:35 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  from chill metal and heat metal spells. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, once per day you can activate the fist. When you do, your next attack with the gauntlet before the end of your turn deals an extra 2d6 points of damage, knocks the target prone, and stuns it for 1 round (Fort DC 22 negates the stun and prone effects). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Bigby’s clenched fist, endure elements. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 3,005 for adamantine spiked gauntlet), 160 XP, 4 days.  FORCEFUL SKYLANCE  Illus. by D. Martin  Price (Item Level): 8,310 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 10 lb. Images of blazing blue comets streak across this slender silver lance. Blue ribbons trail from the weapon’s handle. Three times per day, you can command this +1 lance to produce a magic missile effect, firing three missiles with each use. These missiles can be aimed at up to three targets within 150 feet of you. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic missile. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 310 gp for masterwork lance), 320 XP, 8 days.  FOUNTAINHEAD ARROW Price (Item Level): 306 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: — (ammunition) Weight: —  deals 2d8 points of acid damage to all creatures in the area (Reflex DC 14 half). This effect continues for 3 rounds. A fountainhead arrow can be created as a crossbow bolt for the same price. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Melf’s acid arrow. Cost to Create: 150 gp (plus 6 gp for masterwork arrow), 12 XP, 1 day.  GALEB DUHR HAMMER Price (Item Level): 5,312 gp (10th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 15 lb. The head of this massive warhammer is made of living rock. A galeb duhr hammer acts as a +1 warhammer. In addition, if you have the stonecunning racial ability, the hammer gains an extra ability. Whenever you score a critical hit with a galeb duhr hammer against a creature standing on the ground, the surface your target is standing on attempts to hold the creature in place. For 5 rounds, the victim’s speed falls to 5 feet and it takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls and to AC. Lore: Galeb duhrs are enigmatic and taciturn rock creatures. A galeb duhr hammer is actually the nascent form of a galeb duhr, as yet unintelligent, gifted by the clan fathers to certain dwarves and other earth friends to serve as a living weapon against common enemies. Someone who wields a galeb duhr hammer without the permission of the hammer’s creator faces the possibility of being hunted down and crushed (Knowledge [arcana] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, stone shape. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 312 gp for masterwork warhammer), 200 XP, 5 days.  This sheet of gossamer-thin netting has an iridescent sheen. You can throw this item at a target as though it were an ordinary net. It has no effect against corporeal targets, but any incorporeal target hit by a ghost net is treated as corporeal for the purpose of dealing damage to it with physical or magical attacks (though the net doesn’t entangle an incorporeal target). It can be hit with normal weapons (though its normal damage reduction, if any, still applies), and it does not have the usual 50% chance to ignore damage from corporeal sources. A creature ensnared by a ghost net also cannot turn ethereal (or, if snared on the Ethereal Plane, can’t return to the Material Plane). The creature retains all its other special abilities and can extract itself from the net with a successful DC 20 Escape Artist check as a full-round action. However, a ghost net can’t be burst with a Strength check as a normal net can. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, ghost trap (SC 103). Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork net), 320 XP, 8 days.  HOOKED HAMMER OF THE HEARTHFIRE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,120 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — Weight: 6 lb.  These weapons were created to help the gnomes defend their holdings. While you wield a hooked hammer of the hearthfire, it functions as a +1/+1 gnome hooked hammer if you are neutral good, neutral, chaotic good, or lawful good. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, both ends of this weapon also have the flaming property (DMG 224). Furthermore, your  A fountainhead arrow is an otherwise normal arrow designed to be targeted at a point on the ground, a wall, or any other flat surface. If you hit the target area (treat as AC 5), the arrow creates a geyser of spewing acid. Each round on your turn (starting on the turn you fired the arrow), the arrow creates a 10-foot-radius burst of acid that  620_10762_Chp2.indd 52  Price (Item Level): 8,320 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Moderate; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  The metal ends of this gnome hooked hammer glow with a faint reddish hue. Its haft is decorated with iron bosses and uncut gemstones.  This redwood arrow smells acrid and feels damp to the touch.  52  GHOST NET  Fountainhead arrow  12/21/06 5:23:42 AM  Strips of camel skin wrap the handle of this strange whip, but the rest of its length seems to be a ribbon of cohesive sand. This +1 desiccating burst whip is twice as heavy as a normal whip, deals lethal damage, and is effective even against opponents in armor. Once per day, you can activate the whip when you strike an opponent with it. Doing so creates a mass of leather bindings that enwrap the target, entangling it as if with a net (PH 119) for 3 rounds or until it escapes. Each round the creature remains entangled, it takes 1d4 points of damage, or 1d8 points if it is a plant or an elemental that has the water subtype. Nonliving creatures take no damage from this effect. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate rope, desiccate (Snd 114). Cost to Create: 11,000 gp (plus 301 gp for masterwork whip), 880 XP, 22 days.  LIVING CHAIN Price (Item Level): 4,325 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 10 lb. This chain sports wicked-looking, razor-sharp barbs and seems to writhe with a life of its own. This +1 spiked chain coils around the target’s limbs on a successful attack, granting you a +2 bonus on Strength checks made to trip the target. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 325 gp for masterwork spiked chain), 160 XP, 4 days.  MACE OF THE DARK CHILDREN  This greatsword has a wavy blade and an oversized hilt adorned with six spikes. Manticore greatswords were designed to mimic the spike-throwing ability of their namesake creature. Such a weapon functions as a +1 greatsword. When you activate this weapon, you can launch either one spike (a standard action) or all six spikes (a full-round action) from its hilt as a ranged attack that provokes attacks of opportunity. Treat the spikes as thrown weapons. Each spike deals 1d6 points of piercing damage and has a range increment of 20 feet. The spikes have an enhancement bonus equal to that of the weapon, and are treated as being made of the same material and having the same alignment (if any) as the weapon. The spikes crumble to dust 1 round after they are launched from the weapon. A manticore greatsword regenerates any thrown spikes at dawn each day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic missile. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 350 gp for masterwork greatsword), 200 XP, 5 days.  METEORIC KNIFE  Price (Item Level): 8,012 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 8 lb.  Price (Item Level): 2,802 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1/2 lb.  This heavy mace’s blackened metal haft looks like a fleshless human femur. Its head is shaped like a skull with three screaming skeletal faces, each howling in a different direction.  This throwing knife is made from a seamless piece of shining black metal.  This +1 adamantine heavy mace grants you a +3 profane bonus on rebuke undead attempts. You also treat your level as two higher when determining how many Hit Dice of undead you can rebuke. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, animate dead. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 3,012 for adamantine heavy mace), 200 XP, 5 days.  WEAPONS  Price (Item Level): 22,301 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: Free (mental) Weight: 4 lb.  Hooked hammer of the hearthﬁre  Price (Item Level): 5,350 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Standard (command) or full-round (command) Weight: —  CHAPTER 2  LASH OF SANDS  MANTICORE GREATSWORD  Illus. by W. England  hooked hammer of the hearthfire automatically deals 1d6 points of fire damage per round to any kobold or goblinoid unfortunate enough to grasp its handle. To use the relic power, you must worship Garl Glittergold and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. If you sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 Hit Dice, both ends of the weapon instead have the flaming burst property (DMG 224). Lore: It is said that Garl Glittergold gave one of these weapons to each of twelve noble gnome families many centuries ago. Of these, eight are believed to remain among the gnomes (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, flame strike. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp (plus 620 gp for masterwork/masterwork hooked hammer), 180 XP, 5 days.  This knife functions as a +1 dagger. In addition, a meteoric knife has three charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges enhances the dagger’s magical properties as described below. The effects last for 1 round. 1 charge: The dagger gains the returning property. 2 charges: The dagger gains the flaming and returning properties. 3 charges: The dagger gains the flaming and returning properties (DMG 224–225). In addition, if it hits a creature, it deals  53  620_10762_Chp2.indd 53  12/21/06 5:23:45 AM  normal damage and creates an explosion of fire that deals an extra 3d6 points of fire damage to the target and all creatures adjacent to it (Reflex DC 14 half). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, fireball, telekinesis. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork dagger), 100 XP, 3 days.  Morningstar of the many  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  MORNINGSTAR OF THE MANY [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 7,308 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 6 lb.  QUARTERSTAFF OF BATTLE Price (Item Level): 24,600 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 4 lb.  Illus. by W. England  This austere morningstar glows with an eerie blue light at all times, and its form feels unstable. It is said that these morningstars have been dipped in the blood of creatures from every known plane on the Great Wheel. When you wield it, a morningstar of the many functions as a +1 morningstar if you are chaotic evil, neutral evil, or chaotic neutral. Furthermore, the weapon overcomes damage reduction as if it has all four of the alignment descriptors (chaotic, evil, good, and lawful). Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can command a morningstar of the many to mutate for 6 rounds, taking on a different form and weapon property each round, as given on the following table. The weapon retains its normal enhancement bonus regardless of its form. Round Weapon and Property* 1 vicious morningstar 2 flaming burst shortspear 3 anarchic morningstar 4 wounding battleaxe 5 unholy morningstar 6 vorpal longsword * See DMG 223–226 for details of these properties.  After the 6th round, a morningstar of the many again becomes a +1 morningstar until you speak the command word again. This ability functions five times per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Erythnul and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD.  Three times per day, you can touch any object created of force (such as Bigby’s forceful hand or a wall of force) with this +1 heavy pick. Treat this touch as a touch attack against the touch AC provided by the spell or AC 0, if the spell does not provide the force effect with an AC of its own. A successful touch attack destroys the object as if you had cast disintegrate on it. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, disintegrate. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 308 gp for masterwork pick), 360 XP, 9 days.  Lore: The six original morningstars of the many were taken from defeated champions from the Upper Planes. The god Erythnul dipped them in the blood of their fallen owners and granted them a bit of his chaotic essence before distributing them to his own champions (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, circle of death. Cost to Create: 3,500 gp (plus 308 gp for masterwork morningstar), 280 XP, 7 days.  PICK OF PIERCING Price (Item Level): 9,308 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 6 lb. The tips of this heavy pick taper to needlelike points. The stylized image of a stern, bearded dwarf glowers from the center of the weapon.  A ring of snapped arrows has been etched at one end of this metal quarterstaff, while around the other runs a ring of broken skulls. While wielding this +1/+1 quarterstaff, you can attempt to disarm opponents as if you had the Improved Disarm feat. In addition, a quarterstaff of battle has three abilities you can use when you activate the weapon. 1. For the next 2 rounds, the staff automatically deflects all ranged attacks from Medium or smaller attackers, as well as all ranged attacks created by spells of 2nd level or lower, that target you or any ally adjacent to you. This ability functions three times per day. 2. Both ends of the staff gain the speed weapon property (DMG 225) for 5 rounds. This ability functions once per day. 3. Your next attack with the quarterstaff of battle on this turn is a battlestrike. If the battlestrike hits, the quarterstaff deals an extra 2d6 points of damage, and the target is knocked prone and stunned for 1 round (Fort DC 22 negates the stun and prone effects). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, haste, protection from arrows, Tenser’s transformation. Cost to Create: 12,000 gp (plus 600 for masterwork/masterwork quarterstaff), 960 XP, 24 days.  Pick of piercing  54  620_10762_Chp2.indd 54  12/21/06 5:23:50 AM  Mace of the dark children Lash of sands  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Illus. by B. Trott, D. Grifﬁth & W. England  Q uarterstaff of battle  (DMG 225) while you have fewer than half your full normal hit points. To use the relic power, you must worship Olidammara and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: The first of these rapiers was crafted by a rogue/sorcerer who had been rescued one too many times by her party’s paladin, only to hear a lecture on her erratic behavior. She gave the rapier to a disguised Olidammara when she met him in a tavern. Since then, the Laughing Rogue has awarded one of these rapiers to a fellow traveler whenever the whim strikes him (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, keen edge. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork rapier), 360 XP, 9 days.  RAPIER OF DESPERATE MEASURES [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 9,320 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. The hilt of this rapier is set with three moonstones. At the base of the blade is an inscription that reads, “Caution is for the cowardly.” Those who live by their wits often find themselves in situations over their heads. This rapier is an incomparable boon to those in such situations. When you wield a rapier of desperate measures, it functions as a +2 rapier if you are chaotic neutral, neutral, chaotic good, or chaotic evil. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a rapier of desperate measures gains the keen property (DMG 225) while you have fewer than your full normal hit points, and the speed property  620_10762_Chp2.indd 55  Rapier of desperate measures  Rapier of unerring direction  RAPIER OF UNERRING DIRECTION [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 9,320 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) divination Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This rapier has a curved blade and a hand guard of delicate golden filigree. This deadly weapon can fi nd hidden enemies and pierce the protective magic that veils their true locations. When you wield a rapier of unerring direction, it functions as a +1 ghost touch rapier. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a rapier of unerring direction automatically ignores all miss chances, whether they stem from concealment, blink, displacement, or some other source. To use the relic power, you must worship Fharlanghn and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Originally a gift to Fharlanghn from Olidammara, this rapier has since been copied several times by Fharlanghn’s most powerful clerics (Knowledge [religion] DC 20).  55  12/21/06 5:23:54 AM  Activation: See text Weight: 5 lb. As long as a quarterstaff, this rod is carved from a single length of arrow-straight ash, and its ends are shod in gold and silver bands. Raptor arrow  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, true seeing. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork rapier), 360 XP, 9 days.  RAPTOR ARROW [RELIC]  Illus. by D. Martin  Price (Item Level): 6,006 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: — (ammunition) Weight: — This arrow is carved from a straight piece of ash and fletched with feathers from a predatory bird. Its head is curved at the tip, like a raptor’s beak. Raptor arrows harness the power of the falcon to skewer their prey. When you fire a raptor arrow, it functions as a +1 arrow with a variant of the returning quality if you are neutral good, lawful good, chaotic good, or neutral. At the beginning of the round after it is fired from a bow, a raptor arrow flies through the air and restrings itself on the bow from which it was fired. Unlike most ammunition, raptor arrows are not destroyed when used. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a raptor arrow also gains the bane property (DMG 224) against the targeted foe. To use the relic power, you must worship Ehlonna and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat. Lore: The first of these arrows (reputedly a set of five) gained relic status when Ehlonna used them to slay a great wyrm green dragon that was rampaging through a primeval forest (Knowledge [religion] DC 20) Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, summon monster I. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 6 gp for masterwork arrow), 240 XP, 6 days.  56  620_10762_Chp2.indd 56  ROD OF CATS Price (Item Level): 10,600 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation and transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 4 lb. The head of this long rod of black wood bears the stylized visage of a wise-looking feline, its green gemstone eyes glimmering as if alive. When held, this +1/masterwork quarterstaff grants you low-light vision and a +5 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. These are continuous effects and requires no activation. Once per day, you can activate a rod of cats to gain one of two different effects: The rod creates a spider climb effect on you with a duration of 50 minutes, or it creates a darkness effect, targeted on the rod. You and anyone else touching the rod of cats can see normally within this darkness. The rod also has a secret compartment (requiring a successful DC 25 Search check to find) large enough to hold a set of thieves’ tools, a scroll, or another object of similar size. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, cat’s grace, darkness, low-light vision (SC 134), spider climb. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp (plus 600 gp for masterwork/ masterwork quarterstaff ), 400 XP, 10 days.  ROD OF CELESTIAL MIGHT Price (Item Level): 38,600 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration  Designed to battle the denizens of the Lower Planes, a rod of celestial might functions as a +1/+1 quarterstaff. Its abilities can be activated only by a non-evil character. A rod of celestial might has two abilities you can activate under specific circumstances. 1. After a successful attack with the rod against an evil outsider, you can trigger a holy smite effect centered on the target as an immediate (command) action. This ability functions three times per day. 2. If you are within 60 feet of an evil outsider, you can summon an avoral guardinal (as summon monster VII) as a standard (command) action. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, holy smite, summon monster VII. Cost to Create: 19,000 gp (plus 600 gp for masterwork/masterwork quarterstaff), 1,520 XP, 38 days.  ROD OF DEFIANCE Price (Item Level): 7,312 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. This crudely shaped, bone-white rod resembles a cudgel. You can use a rod of defiance in combat as a +1 heavy mace. In addition, each undead creature within 30 feet of you while you hold the rod is treated as if it had 4 fewer Hit Dice (minimum 1 HD) for the purpose of turn or rebuke undead checks. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, turn undead or rebuke undead. Cost to Create: 3,500 gp (plus 312 gp for masterwork heavy mace), 280 XP, 7 days.  Rod of celestial might  12/21/06 5:24:02 AM  Rod of the recluse  ROD OF ENERVATING STRIKE  ROD OF FREEDOM Price (Item Level): 18,402 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: See text Weight: 6 lb. This macelike scepter has an ornate head fashioned of gold filigree mounted on a thick copper shaft. This +1 silver heavy mace has three special abilities. As long as the rod of freedom is in your hand, you gain a +4 morale bonus on saving throws against charm or compulsion effects. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can activate a rod of freedom as a free (mental) action at will to deal nonlethal damage without penalty  ROD OF THE RECLUSE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 9,305 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 5 lb.  Rod of surprises  Illus. by W. England  Crafted from wood exposed to the Negative Energy Plane, a rod of enervating strike functions as a +1 heavy mace. In addition, when you successfully strike a creature with the rod in melee, the target is subjected to an inflict light wounds effect (1d8+5 damage; Will DC 11 half). If you score a critical hit with the rod, the creature is instead subjected to an inflict serious wounds effect (3d8+15 damage; Will DC 14 half). When you use the rod on a minor negative-dominant plane, its inflict effects are empowered as if by the Empower Spell feat. When used on a major negative-dominant plane, these effects are maximized as if by the Maximize Spell feat. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, inflict serious wounds. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp (plus 312 gp for masterwork heavy mace), 720 XP, 18 days.  WEAPONS  This iron-shod oaken rod is blackened and weathered, yet sturdy.  Lore: These weapons were originally crafted by Lolth from the legs of driders who attempted to regain her favor (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, Sanctify Relic, poison. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 305 gp for masterwork light mace), 360 XP, 9 days.  CHAPTER 2  Price (Item Level): 18,312 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 8 lb.  on your next attack roll. You must decide before you make the attack whether you will activate this ability. Third, any time you strike a creature that is under a charm or compulsion effect with the rod, you can activate it as a swift (command) action to make a special caster level check (1d20+9) and attempt to dispel the effect (DC 11 + caster level of the effect). This ability functions five times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, break enchantment. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp (plus 402 gp for masterwork silver heavy mace), 720 XP, 18 days.  This rod resembles a giant spider leg, complete with segmentations and coarse black hairs. Rods of the recluse are usually found in the possession of Lolth’s high priestesses. When you wield this rod, it functions as a +2 light mace if you are chaotic evil, neutral evil, or chaotic neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can activate the rod to deliver poison (Fort DC 20, 2d6 Str/2d6 Str) with the next melee attack you make with it. If you score a critical hit, the Strength damage from that blow (both initial and secondary) becomes Strength drain instead. This ability functions five times per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Lolth and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD.  Rod of enervating strike  Rod of freedom  Rod of cats  57  620_10762_Chp2.indd 57  12/21/06 5:24:05 AM  Storm gauntlets  Spider fang  Scourge of pain  Illus. by B. Trott & R. Spencer  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Rogue blade  ROD OF SURPRISES Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) illusion, transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 2 lb. Numerous seams, hinges, and bolts cover this otherwise simple-looking blunt metal rod. At one end, five black buttons jut forth. Similar to a rod of lordly might, a rod of surprises has both combat and utilitarian features. Its buttons can be depressed, singly or in various combinations, to cause the rod to lengthen and even sprout a blade. It can be used as a javelin, kama, longspear, quarterstaff, scythe, shortspear, short sword, or spear. A rod is treated as a +1 weapon in any of these forms. The rod can store a message of up to twenty-five words as the magic mouth spell, replaying the message when the triggering conditions are met (such as when a specific word is spoken). You can reset the message as a standard action, and you choose the trigger. The rod can also lengthen up to 60 feet and support up to 800 pounds without bending. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, levitate, magic mouth, wood shape. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 9 days.  ROGUE BLADE  ROD OF WHIPS Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 2 lb. Tightly wrapped and knotted strands of black leather make up this short rod, allowing for a solid grip, which nonetheless looks incomplete. On command, a rod of whips grows a magic tendril of force from one end that functions as a whip. Once activated, a rod of whips acts as a +1 dancing whip that can strike incorporeal creatures as a force effect. A rod of whips can be activated three times per day, and each activation lasts for 10 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, animate objects, spiritual weapon. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days. Ruby blade  Price (Item Level): 12,320 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) illusion Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. The edges of this elegant rapier seem to fade and twitch, making it difficult to look at directly and surrounding it with a blur of motion though it remains perfectly still. When you activate this +1 rapier, it provides you with the effect of a blink spell for 6 rounds. The effect ends prematurely if you stop holding the rogue blade. This effect can be used twice per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, blink. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork rapier), 480 XP, 12 days.  RUBY BLADE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 20,302 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  58  620_10762_Chp2.indd 58  12/21/06 5:24:09 AM  This deep red, translucent dagger is carved from a single piece of crystal. It has a rounded, razorsharp blade and a second blade-shaped head at its other end, though the latter is too small to be usable as a weapon. Its ornate design pays homage to the gemcutter’s art.  The black leather lashes of this terrible scourge are covered in lengths of rusted wire, bits of broken red glass, and tiny fangs. Each time this +1 scourge strikes, it deals an extra 1d8 points of nonlethal damage and causes agonizing pain in the creature struck. The target takes a –4 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, and checks for 1d4 rounds  The shaft of this rowanwood spear appears slightly curved, and its base is shod with a metal arrow point.  Spears of retribution are widely known as the instruments of Gruumsh’s wrath. When you wield a spear of retribution, it functions as a +1 returning spear if you are chaotic evil, chaotic neutral, or neutral evil. Relic Power: If you have established Carried primarily by kobold heroes, the proper divine connection, you gain these spears were designed to be a +2 morale bonus on attack rolls and true to their name. When you carry damage rolls made with a spear of retribua skewer-of-gnomes, it functions as a tion against any enemy that dealt damage Small +1 gnome bane spear if you to you in the previous round. Against an are lawful evil, lawful neutral, enemy that scored a critical hit against or neutral evil. you in the previous round, the spear also Relic Power: If you have gains the keen property (DMG 225). established the proper divine To use the relic power, you must worconnection, the spear also gains ship Gruumsh and either sacrifice a the unholy property (DMG 226) 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True and reveals its quasisentience Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Once in a great while, Gruand abilities to you. A skewer-of- Spear of gnomes automatically sets retribution umsh flings a spear at one of his clerics itself against a charge, with whom he is annoyed. If that cleric then atones for the transgression attacking and dealing double and keeps the spear, it becomes a spear of damage whenever a foe charges you. retribution (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). This attack uses your highest base attack bonus and all relevant modifiers, Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and just as if you were making an attack of Armor, Sanctify Relic, righteous might. opportunity. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 302 gp for To use the relic power, you must wormasterwork spear), 180 XP, 9 days. ship Kurtulmak and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the SPECTRAL DAGGER True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Lore: The first four skewers-ofBody Slot: — (held) gnomes were created for the kings Caster Level: 5th of the most powerful kobold Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy tribes by weaponsmiths working in Activation: — cooperation with Kurtulmak’s clergy. Weight: 1 lb. Since then, the secret of their manufacture has been passed down from parent This pocked and notched piece of yellowed bone to child and is known to only a handful seems to have once been used as the pommel for of kobold weaponmakers (Knowledge a dagger, though the blade is now missing. [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and When you grasp the hilt of a spectral dagger, Armor, Sanctify Relic, unholy blight. a “blade” of ghostly light coalesces into existence. The weapon has no enhance-  This spear has an ornate bone head carved to resemble a skull with its mouth open in a scream. Its shaft is set with long spikes, and the base is shod with a metal tip molded in the shape of a skull.  Skewer-ofgnomes  620_10762_Chp2.indd 59  Price (Item Level): 9,302 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 6 lb.  WEAPONS  Price (Item Level): 26,320 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 2 lb.  Price (Item Level): 9,302 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — Weight: 4 lb.  SPEAR OF RETRIBUTION [RELIC]  CHAPTER 2  SCOURGE OF PAIN  SKEWER-OFGNOMES [RELIC]  Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork spear), 360 XP, 9 days.  Illus. by W. England & D. Grifﬁth  When you wield a ruby blade, it functions as a +1 axiomatic dagger if you are lawful evil, lawful neutral, lawful good, or neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, and if you have levels in a class that allows you to rebuke undead, your effective level in that class is considered 4 higher for the purpose of bolstering, rebuking, or commanding undead. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can activate a ruby blade to produce the effect of a status spell once per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Wee Jas and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD. Lore: Legend holds that the first ruby blades were plucked from among the gems on the hem of Wee Jas’s gown. Since then, certain high priests have acquired the skill to create them (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, order’s wrath, status. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork dagger), 120 XP, 20 days.  (Fort DC 17 negates). Multiple strikes on the same creature don’t stack. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, symbol of pain. Cost to Create: 13,000 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork scourge), 1,040 XP, 26 days.  59  12/21/06 5:24:16 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  ment bonus (and can’t be imbued with one). Attacks with a spectral dagger are treated as touch attacks, but the weapon does not deal damage normally. Instead, any target struck by the weapon is affected by a chill touch spell (Fort DC 11 partial or Will DC 11 negates; see PH 209). A spectral dagger fades away if it leaves your hand, so the weapon can’t be used to make ranged attacks. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, chill touch. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  STAFF OF THE UNYIELDING OAK  point pick on the other. The haft looks as thought it’s made from cracked granite.  [RELIC]  In the hands of a nondwarf, stonereaver functions as a +1 greataxe. In the hands of a dwarf, the weapon also gains the bane property (DMG 224) against elementals that have the earth subtype and against constructs primarily made of earth, stone, or metal. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, stone shape. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 320 gp for masterwork greataxe), 240 XP, 6 days.  SPIDER FANG  Illlus. by W. England  Price (Item Level): 5,302 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. Of grotesque design, this seemingly organic dagger appears to be made from sharpened layers of purple-black chitin. Sinister weblike patterns cover its surface, and the blade occasionally twitches and jerks of its own accord. This +1 dagger quickly cuts through webs (magical or otherwise) without getting stuck. As a move action, you can cut through a web entangling you or another creature. You can move through webs created by a web spell at half your normal speed (although the weapon doesn’t prevent you from being stuck in either of these webs in the first place). These are continuous effects and require no activation. Once per day, you can activate a spider fang to create a freestanding 10foot-by-10-foot vertical curtain of cobwebs. This curtain doesn’t block movement, but does provide concealment to creatures behind it. Anyone touching the curtain causes it to collapse, dealing 2d4 points of acid damage to that creature. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Melf’s acid arrow, web. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork dagger), 200 XP, 5 days.  60  620_10762_Chp2.indd 60  Price (Item Level): 5,600 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 4 lb. This sturdy quarterstaff is formed of living wood, as evidenced by the tender shoots and leaves along its length. A staff of the unyielding oak is actually a treant bound into quarterstaff form. When you wield this weapon, it functions as a +1/+1 quarterstaff if you are neutral, neutral good, neutral evil, lawful neutral, or chaotic neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can command this staff to become a treant. This ability functions like the changestaff spell, except that the treant is fully real and can speak to other treants and animated trees. If a staff of the unyielding oak in treant form is reduced to 0 hit points or fewer, it reverts to staff form and cannot be used again for twenty-eight days. The staff can take treant form any number of times per day, but can be in that form for only 12 hours overall during any one day. To use the relic power, you must worship Obad-Hai and either sacrifice a 8th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 15 HD. Lore: These staffs, of which three are known to exist, are treants that have willingly bound themselves into quarterstaff form to aid Obad-Hai’s followers. Each willingly serves for a year and a day, after which another treant takes over the responsibility (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, changestaff. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 600 gp for masterwork/masterwork quarterstaff), 200 XP, 5 days.  STONEREAVER Price (Item Level): 6,320 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 12 lb. Half of the head of this greataxe is a curved blade, while the other side tapers to a chisel-  STUNSHOT SLING Price (Item Level): 7,800 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Free (command) Weight: — This sling is stitched with tiny images of stylized bull’s heads. This weapon functions as a +1 sling. Three times per day, you can activate a stunshot sling so that the next target you hit on your current turn must succeed on a Fortitude save (DC equal to your attack roll result) or be stunned for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, sound burst. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp (plus 300 gp for masterwork sling), 300 XP, 8 days.  SWORD OF MIGHTY THEWS [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 9,350 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 8 lb. This ostentatious greatsword is decorated with golden filigree, and its hilt is set with a large ruby. Along its blade is an inscription in Draconic that reads, “Size is not strength.” These swords were designed for dragonslayers of great strength. When you wield a sword of mighty thews, it functions as a +1 dragonbane greatsword, provided that you are chaotic good, neutral good, or chaotic neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you are immune to the frightful presence of dragons as long as you wield the sword. In addition, you gain a +5 luck bonus  Staff of the unyielding oak  12/21/06 5:24:19 AM  Sword of mighty thews  Price (Item Level): 9,315 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 4 lb. The blade of this golden longsword is set with four cabochon-cut rubies, and its pommel sports a ruby-centered golden sun. A sword of virtue beyond reproach is designed to grant a measure of respite from charms and compulsions. When you wield this  SWORDBOW, GREAT Price (Item Level): 6,775 gp (11th) Weight: 8 lb. This massive bow is made entirely razorsharp steel, yet it clearly functions as a potent ranged weapon. This item functions as a swordbow (see above), except that its two forms are a +1 composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) and a +1 greatsword. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item, elf. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 775 gp for masterwork composite longbow), 240 XP, 6 days.  SWORDBOW, LIGHT Price (Item Level): 6,330 gp (10th) Weight: 2 lb.  The limbs of this bow appear to be made of sharpened metal, as if the bow had been crafted from two thin, flexible swords.  Small and compact, this bow seems made of thin, but strong, metal sharp enough to rival the deadliest of swords. This item functions as a swordbow, except that its two forms are a +1 shortbow and a +1 rapier. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item, elf. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 330 gp for masterwork shortbow), 240 XP, 6 days.  This +1 longbow changes into a +1 longsword (or vice versa) when activated. You can interchange bow and sword attacks as part of the same full attack action. In sword form, the weapon features a bowlike grip and a pommel that resembles the curving tip of a bow. In bow form, the weapon is made of metal, and each limb of the bow resembles a sword blade. In either form, a swordbow has the same enhancement bonus. A swordbow’s enhancement bonus can be improved as if improving two separate weapons (for example,  TENTACLE ROD Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. Sword of virtue beyond reproach  620_10762_Chp2.indd 61  WEAPONS  [RELIC]  Price (Item Level): 6,375 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 3 lb.  CHAPTER 2  SWORD OF VIRTUE BEYOND REPROACH  SWORDBOW  improving a +1 swordbow to a +2 swordbow costs 12,000 gp, just as if you were improving two +1 weapons to +2). A swordbow can have special weapon properties added to it (such as flaming); such properties cost twice the normal amount (again, as if improving two separate weapons) and apply to both weapons if possible. If a property can’t apply to both weapons (such as vorpal or distance), it applies only to the swordbow when it is in an eligible form (for instance, a +1 swordbow of distance is a distance weapon only in bow form). If a property can apply to the weapon in only one of its forms, it does not cost double the regular price. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shrink item, elf. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 375 gp for masterwork longbow), 240 XP, 6 days.  Illus. by S. Ellis & W. England  on Reflex saves against a dragon’s breath weapon. To use the relic power, you must worship Kord and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Kord’s high clerics forged these greatswords in homage to the god’s signature weapon, Kelmar. Since their creation, Kord has awarded one every decade to a hero who has earned his favor (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, antidragon aura (SC 14). Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 350 gp for masterwork greatsword), 180 XP, 9 days.  weapon, it functions as a +1 holy longsword if you are lawful good, neutral good, or lawful neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection and you fail a save against an enemy’s charm or compulsion effect while wielding the sword, you are immune to its effects for 1d4 rounds (DM rolls secretly). The effect is only suppressed during this time, not negated. When the period of suppression ends, any effects received during previous rounds take effect. To use the relic power, you must worship Heironeous and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD. Lore: Four of these longswords were commissioned from celestial dwarves by the great paladin Tardalius the Headstrong, who won favor from Heironeous for his conspicuous valor. Tardalius presented the swords to his four sons, who followed in his footsteps (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Sanctify Relic, mind blank. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp (plus 315 gp for masterwork longsword), 180 XP, 9 days.  61  12/21/06 5:24:22 AM  Greater tentacle rod  Trident of serenity  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  Viperblade  Water whip  Tentacle rod  Illus. by W. England  Swordbow  Three long, russet-colored tentacles sprout from the end of this 2-foot-long rod, writhing sinuously. When activated, a tentacle rod makes three attacks (one per tentacle) against a single target within your melee reach that you designate. The rod uses its own attack bonus (+12) rather than yours, and each attack deals 6 points of bludgeoning damage. Treat the rod as a magic weapon for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. If all three tentacles strike the same living creature in a round, that creature becomes slowed (as the slow spell) for 5 rounds (Fort DC 14 negates). Lore: The secret to crafting the first tentacle rod was learned through nightmarish visions granted by the Elder Elemental Eye (a vile and mysterious divine entity) to its most devoted followers (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Wielding one of these gruesome items soon became a status symbol among the cult’s leaders, which led to a need for a greater version for the most powerful followers of the Elder Elemental Eye (Knowledge [religion] DC 25). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, animate objects, Evard’s black tentacles, slow. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days.  62  620_10762_Chp2.indd 62  TENTACLE ROD, GREATER Price (Item Level): 36,000 gp (17th) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Weight: 6 lb. Six long violet tentacles sprout from the end of this 2-foot-long rod, writhing sinuously when you grasp the handle. When activated, a greater tentacle rod makes six attacks (one per tentacle) against a single target within your melee reach that you designate. The rod uses its own attack bonus (+18), and each attack deals 9 points of bludgeoning damage. Treat the rod as a magic weapon for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. If at least three of a greater tentacle rod’s tentacles strike the same living creature in a round, that creature becomes fatigued (Fort DC 20 negates); creatures already fatigued suffer no additional effect. If all six tentacles strike the same living creature in a round, that creature instead becomes exhausted (Fort DC 20 negates). Lore: See tentacle rod, above. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, animate objects, Evard’s black tentacles, ray of exhaustion, ray of fatigue.  Cost to Create: 18,000 gp, 1,440 XP, 36 days.  TRIDENT OF SERENITY Price (Item Level): 5,315 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 4 lb. This trident looks almost delicate, with fine points on its gradually curving prongs. Silver and pearl inlays form lazy swirls down the weapon’s haft. When you activate this +1 trident, it creates a calm emotions effect centered on you (Will DC 16 negates). The effect lasts for 5 rounds and does not require concentration. Any creature that successfully saves against this effect is immune to further uses of that ability for 24 hours. This ability functions three times per day. Lore: Originally created by aquatic elves for use against the blood frenzy of sahuagin, this weapon has become equally useful in fending off savage barbarians who raid coastal areas (Knowledge [arcana] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, calm emotions.  12/21/06 5:24:28 AM  Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 315 gp for masterwork trident), 200 XP, 5 days.  VIPERBLADE Price (Item Level): 6,302 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  This strange weapon looks less like a traditional whip and more like a tube of water, tapering along its length to icicle sharpness at one end. The handle is crafted from a pale blue crystal shard. This +1 whip shimmers and undulates with deceptive grace when held. Unlike a normal whip, a water whip deals lethal damage and can affect armored creatures. Furthermore, while wielding a water whip,  WHIP OF WEBS Price (Item Level): 6,301 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Free (command) Weight: 1 lb.  WARLOCK’S SCEPTER Price (Item Level): 8,305 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — or swift (mental); see text Weight: 3 lb.  Complex strands of tightly braided spider webs have been woven together to create this unusual whip. Tiny, multilegged black shapes skitter up and down its length, hiding amid its countless knots.  This sturdy ebony rod is surmounted by a carving of a demonic, horned skull.  When you strike a creature with this +1 whip, you can activate it to wrap the target in a web of tough, leathery filaments. The creature is entangled as if by a net (PH 119) for 3 rounds or until it escapes. Multiple strikes by a whip of webs aren’t cumulative. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, web. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 301 gp for masterwork whip), 240 XP, 6 days.  This +1 light mace confers a +1 profane bonus on your ranged touch attack rolls while you hold it. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Furthermore, a warlock’s scepter has 5 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges improves the damage of the next eldritch blast (CAr 7) you make in that round.  Warlock’s scepter  620_10762_Chp2.indd 63  WEAPONS  Price (Item Level): 20,301 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  Illus. by E. Fiegenschuh  Created by cults that worship serpent deities, these +1 daggers are prized for their ability to secrete toxic venom. A viperblade has 5 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges envenoms the blade (at no risk to you) for the next attack you make during this turn. The poison deals 1d6 points of Constitution damage (both primary and secondary). The save DC depends on the number of charges spent: 1 charge: Fortitude DC 12. 2 charges: Fortitude DC 15. 3 charges: Fortitude DC 18. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, poison. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork dagger), 300 XP, 6 days.  WATER WHIP  you are difficult to disarm. If the whip is knocked from your grasp, it immediately flows back into your hand at the beginning of your next turn (even if it is within someone else’s grasp) as long as it is within 30 feet of you. Doing this requires no action on your part. In addition, drawing a water whip is always a free action. Both a fire elemental and water elemental are bound within a water whip, allowing it to emanate either of two energy properties, flaming or frost (DMG 224). You choose the property when you activate the whip, and it deals an extra 1d6 points of the appropriate kind of damage (fire or cold). Lore: The first water whip was created by a sahuagin druid named Ak’ash’eck, who roamed the fringes of a great reef a decade ago (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Ak’ash’eck enjoyed preying on unwary folk sailing south to trade with other sahuagin. He was famous for the trick of ensnaring a victim near the railing of a ship passing at night, then pulling the victim overboard before an alarm could be raised (Knowledge [history] DC 30). Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Magic Arms and Armor, planar binding. Cost to Create: 10,000 (plus 301 gp for masterwork whip), 800 XP, 20 days.  CHAPTER 2  The hilt of this dagger is shaped like a snake, and the twisted blade looks like an impossibly long tongue.  1 charge: +1d6 damage. 3 charges: +2d6 damage. 5 charges: +4d6 damage. After these charges have been expended, the rod remains a +1 light mace, but it no longer provides a bonus on ranged touch attack rolls until its charges are restored. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Rod, bestow curse. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 305 gp for masterwork light mace), 320 XP, 8 days.  63  12/21/06 5:24:33 AM  WEAPON AUGMENT CRYSTALS  Augment crystals are a new category of magic items. See page 221 for details on how they function.  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  CRYSTAL OF ADAMANT WEAPONRY Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) (least); 1,400 gp (5th) (lesser); 3,400 gp (8th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This clasp holds a small diamond orb with a sphere of steel at its center. A crystal of adamant weaponry strengthens your weapon against damage. Least: This crystal improves the hardness of a weapon by 2. Lesser: This crystal improves the hardness of a weapon by 5. Greater: This crystal improves the hardness of a weapon by 10. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, diamondsteel (SC 64). Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day (least); 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days (lesser); 1,700 gp, 136 XP, 4 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF ARCANE STEEL Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least); 2,000 gp (6th) (lesser); 6,000 gp (10th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — The needlelike iron deposits in this spherical quartz crystal pulse with arcane energy. A crystal of arcane steel is designed for those who can blend magical and martial arts into a single strike. It functions only when attached to a melee weapon. Least: This crystal grants a +1 insight bonus on your weapon damage roll when delivering a spell or spell-like ability through a melee attack with the weapon.  Lesser: As the least crystal, and it also grants you a +1 insight bonus on the attack roll. Greater: As the lesser crystal, and it also increases the save DC of the spell or spell-like ability by 1. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, magic weapon. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days (lesser); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF ENERGY ASSAULT Price (Item Level): 600 gp (3rd) (least); 3,000 gp (7th) (lesser); 6,000 gp (10th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — Weight: —  Acid Assault This crystal seems to contain an incandescent green fluid.  Cold Assault Covered in a faint layer of condensation, this clear crystal radiates chilling waves of energy.  Electricity Assault A brilliant blue color, this crystal sparks and snaps with electrical discharge.  Fire Assault This fiery red crystal appears to burn with a heatless flame. A crystal of energy assault adds a particular type of energy damage to a weapon’s attacks: acid, cold, electricity, or fire. This bonus damage doesn’t stack with any energy damage of the same type dealt by the weapon. Least: This crystal adds 1 point of energy damage of its type to the weapon’s damage. Lesser: This crystal adds an extra 1d6 points of energy damage of its type to the weapon’s damage. Greater: This crystal adds an extra 1d6 points of energy damage of its type to the weapon’s damage, as well as a secondary effect depending on the type of crystal: Acid Assault: Target takes –1 penalty to AC for 1 round (multiple hits on the same creature don’t stack).  Cold Assault: Target’s speed is reduced by 10 feet for 1 round, to a minimum speed of 5 feet (multiple hits on the same creature don’t stack). Electricity Assault: Target is dazzled for 1 round. Fire Assault: Target takes an additional 1d6 points of fire damage 1 round later (multiple hits on the same creature don’t increase the next round’s damage beyond 1d6). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor; Melf’s acid arrow, ray of frost, lightning bolt, or fireball; or energy bolt (EPH 100). Cost to Create: 300 gp, 24 XP, 1 day (least); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (lesser); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF ILLUMINATION Price (Item Level): 100 gp (1st) (least); 400 gp (2nd) (lesser); 1,000 gp (4th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This faceted, yellow crystal glows as if a small spark burns within it. Activating a crystal of illumination causes your weapon to glow. Least: The weapon sheds bright illumination in a 5-foot radius and shadowy illumination for 5 feet beyond that. Lesser: The weapon sheds bright illumination in a 20-foot radius and shadowy illumination for 20 feet beyond that. Greater: The weapon sheds bright illumination in a 60-foot radius and shadowy illumination for 60 feet beyond that. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, daylight. Cost to Create: 50 gp, 4 XP, 1 day (least); 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day (lesser); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (greater).  CRYSTAL OF LIFE DRINKING Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) (least); 1,500 gp (5th) (lesser); 6,000 gp (10th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Weight: —  64  620_10762_Chp2.indd 64  12/21/06 5:24:36 AM  This transparent black crystal has a faint, sickly glow.  Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) (least); 1,000 (4th) (lesser); 4,000 gp (8th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This crystal is the color of a cloudless sky. A crystal of return allows a weapon to leap into its owner’s hand. Least: This crystal allows you to draw the weapon to which it is attached as a free action. Lesser: As the least crystal, and in addition you can call the weapon (if unattended) to your hand from up to 30 feet away as a move action. Greater: As the lesser crystal, and the weapon also gains the returning property (DMG 225). This property functions only for a weapon designed to be thrown. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, mage hand. Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day (least); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (lesser); 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days (greater).  This cool, silver-tinted crystal emanates feelings of peace and safety when held. A crystal of security makes a weapon cling tightly to your hand during normal use. Least: This crystal grants you a +2 bonus on any check made to draw the weapon (such as when grappling) or to keep the weapon in your hand (such as on an opposed disarm check or an opposed Strength check if you and an opponent both grab the weapon). Lesser: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +5. Greater: As the least crystal, except the bonus is +10. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day (least); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (lesser); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (greater).  DEMOLITION CRYSTAL Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) (least); 3,000 gp (7th) (lesser); 6,000 gp (10th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This blue-white diamond bears a tiny adamantine emblem of a hammer. Demolition crystals were designed for those who fight constructs, particularly for the servants of wizards who battle enemy golems. Least: A weapon with this crystal attached deals an extra 1d6 points of damage to constructs. Lesser: As the least crystal, and the weapon is treated as adamantine for the purpose of overcoming the damage reduction of constructs. Greater: As the lesser crystal, and the weapon can deliver sneak attacks and critical hits against constructs as if they were living creatures. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, disintegrate.  FIENDSLAYER CRYSTAL Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) (least); 3,000 gp (7th) (lesser); 5,000 gp (9th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  WEAPONS  CRYSTAL OF RETURN  Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) (least); 1,000 gp (4th) (lesser); 3,000 gp (7th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (least); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (lesser); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (greater).  CHAPTER 2  A crystal of life drinking bestows a small amount of life energy upon you each time you damage a living creature with the weapon to which the crystal is attached. Dealing nonlethal damage with the weapon doesn’t activate the crystal’s effect. Least: Each time you deal damage to a living creature with the weapon to which this crystal is attached, you heal 1 point of damage. When the crystal has healed a total of 10 points of damage, it becomes inert until the following day. Lesser: As the least crystal, except that you heal 3 points of damage with each attack until the crystal has healed 30 points of damage. Greater: As the least crystal, except that you heal 5 points of damage with each attack until the crystal has healed 50 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day (least); 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days (lesser); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (greater).  CRYSTAL OF SECURITY  This perfect crystal sphere emits a faint white glow. A fiendslayer crystal helps you fight creatures infused with evil. Least: A weapon with this crystal attached deals an extra 1d6 points of damage to evil outsiders. Lesser: As the least crystal, and the weapon is treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Greater: As the lesser crystal, and if the weapon scores a critical hit against an evil outsider, that creature can’t use any teleportation abilities or spells for 1 round. Any evil creature grasping a weapon that bears a fiendslayer crystal gains one negative level, which remains as long as it holds the weapon and disappears when the weapon is no longer wielded. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the weapon is wielded. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, align weapon, good alignment. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (least); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (lesser); 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days (greater).  PHOENIX ASH THREAT Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) (least); 2,000 gp (6th) (lesser); 6,000 gp (10th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — Weight: — Alternating fire opals and jacinths comprise this glittering chain of gemstones. The augment crystal known as a phoenix ash threat leaves smoldering embers on your enemies after every strike. Each round, at the start of your turn, the embers  65  620_10762_Chp2.indd 65  12/21/06 5:24:38 AM  WEAPONS  CHAPTER 2  deal fire damage to each target struck by the weapon in the previous round. Least: If you hit a creature with a weapon bearing this crystal, that target takes 1 point of fire damage on the following round. Multiple hits by the weapon against the same target aren’t cumulative. Lesser: As the least crystal, but the target takes 3 points of fire damage. Greater: As the least crystal, but the target takes 5 points of fire damage. Lore: This crystal was first employed by mystic swordsmen of the Golden Desert (Knowledge [arcana or history] DC 15). The first signs that it was in use in more civilized lands were the charred bodies of Graz’zt cultists left piled outside their dark abbey’s door after Sir Alax of Bergholdt cleansed the den with his fiery sword (Knowledge [arcana or history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, burning hands. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day (least); 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days (lesser); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (greater).  REVELATION CRYSTAL Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) (least); 1,000 gp (4th) (lesser); 5,000 gp (9th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) divination Activation: — Weight: — This tiger’s-eye gem bears a striking resemblance to the eye of a cat, its gaze seeming to dart about. A revelation crystal help you battle foes who rely on invisibility. Least: When you damage an invisible creature using a weapon with this augment crystal attached, the creature emits a glowing golden aura for 1 round, allowing everyone to know the square or squares it occupies and where it moves during that duration. The aura is as bright as a torch. Despite the glow in the square, creatures that attack the invisible foe still suffer a 50% miss chance; the glow merely allows them to determine the appropriate square to attack. Lesser: As the least crystal, but any active invisibility effects on the damaged creature are also suppressed for 1 round (even if the invisibility is natural or extraordinary).  Greater: As the lesser crystal, but it also suppresses active effects on the damaged creature that grant concealment or similar effects (such as blur or displacement) for 1 round. This has no effect on concealment granted by the environment (such as fog or a darkness spell). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, true seeing. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day (least); 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (lesser); 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days (greater).  TRUEDEATH CRYSTAL Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) (least); 5,000 gp (9th) (lesser); 10,000 gp (12th) (greater) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — Weight: — This amethyst is carved in the shape of a humanoid skull. Clerics craft truedeath crystals to aid themselves and others in sending undead to their final rest. Least: A weapon with this crystal attached deals an extra 1d6 points of damage to undead. Lesser: As the least crystal, and the weapon also functions as a ghost touch weapon (DMG 224). Greater: As the lesser crystal, and the weapon can deliver sneak attacks and critical hits against undead as if they were living creatures. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, consecrate. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (least); 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days (lesser); 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days (greater)  WITCHLIGHT RESERVOIR Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (weapon crystal) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: —  As its name suggests, a witchlight reservoir can hold a small quantity of magical power, which can be used to enhance the power of a melee weapon. To imbue this augment crystal with power, you must directly expose it for 8 hours to one of the following substances: sunlight, moonlight, blood, or wine (at least one pint of either of the last two substances). Each one of these substances grants the item a different effect, as described below. Exposing a full reservoir to a new substance replaces the old effect with the new effect. When activated, a reservoir adds an extra effect to its weapon’s next successful melee strike (as long as it is made before the end of your turn). The effect depends on the substance to which the witchlight reservoir was exposed (see above). Sunlight: +2d6 fire damage (or +4d6 fire damage if the target is undead). Moonlight: +2d6 electricity damage (or +4d6 electricity damage if the target is a lycanthrope). Blood: +2d6 damage to a living target. Wine: –2 penalty on Will saves for 1 round. A witchlight reservoir functions five times before it loses its power and must be imbued again. It is considered a greater augment crystal. Lore: The first witchlight reservoir was recovered by Iggwilv from the vanity drawer of one of Graz’zt’s previous paramours (Knowledge [arcana] DC 15). Who created the first sphere is unknown, but the Witch of the Yatils made several more after her discovery, including one for her daughter Drelzna, who employed a bastard sword called The Bleeding Infanta fitted with a blood-filled witchlight reservoir. She carried the weapon until it was lost in battle against a gnome army led by a gold dragon somewhere between Ket and Perrenland (Knowledge [arcana] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, burning hands, shocking grasp, touch of idiocy, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  This coin-sized crystal sphere is inscribed with arcane sigils representing earth, air, wind, fire, magic, death, and beauty. It rattles like soft thunder.  66  620_10762_Chp2.indd 66  12/21/06 5:24:39 AM  Illus. by D. Grifﬁth  More than any other category of items, the collection in suit of armor is nice, but any adventurer whose list of this chapter relies on the body slot entry to constrain your garb begins and ends with “full plate armor” just isn’t choices. Unless you’re comfortgiving himself a reasonable chance of success. From the able making a lot of ad hoc “The arcanist’s gloves would be handy, of humble ring of feather falling decisions about weird combinacourse, but the lightning gauntlets match to the legendary vest of the archmagi, the tions, we recommend that your my cloak better. . . .” campaign only use these items roster of useful (even crucial) magic items worn on the body is vast. —Devis, trying to decide on as designed (rather than switchThis chapter includes nearly 400 his next purchase ing abilities around between various body slots). See “Body magic items designed as clothing, Slots” in Chapter 6 for information on how the body slot jewelry, and the like. Some are fashionable, others crude, but all system works. provide useful benefits that can contribute to your character’s survival.  CLOTHING DESCRIPTIONS  The items in this chapter are arranged alphabetically.  ACROBAT BOOTS Price (Item Level): 900 gp (4th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Multiple brass buckles run from the ankle to the top of the calf on these finely crafted, black leather boots. A pair of acrobat boots grants you a +2 competence bonus on Tumble checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, these boots have 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you an enhancement bonus to your speed for 1 round.  1 charge: +10-foot enhancement bonus. 2 charges: +15-foot enhancement bonus. 3 charges: +20-foot enhancement bonus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace, longstrider. Cost to Create: 450 gp, 36 XP, 1 day.  67  620_10762_Chp3.indd 67  12/21/06 5:35:12 AM  ADAMANTINE MIND BLADE GAUNTLETS  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. Each of these heavy leather gloves bears a violet crystal set on a small plate of adamantine. Adamantine mind blade gauntlets allow you to give your mind blade the properties of adamantine. If you are able to enhance your mind blade (with the mind blade enhancement class feature), whenever you materialize your mind blade while wearing these gauntlets, you can choose to treat it as an adamantine weapon for the purpose of ignoring hardness or overcoming damage reduction. This ability takes the place of a property with a +1 enhancement bonus value. For example, a 6th-level soulknife wearing the gauntlets could either choose to apply the gauntlets’ effect or apply one of the +1 enhancement bonus value properties given on the table (EPH 29). A 10th-level soulknife could apply both the gauntlets’ effect and a +1 enhancement bonus value property rather than applying a combination of properties from the table totaling +2. Adamantine mind blade gauntlets function an unlimited number of times per day. The gauntlets require no separate activation; using them is part of the action to materialize your mind blade. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fabricate, mind blade. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  AMBER AMULET OF VERMIN Price (Item Level): See table Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: See table Aura: See table; (DC varies) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This irregularly shaped piece of natural amber is fastened at the end of a long golden chain. Within the amber a tiny creature still seems to twitch. This item summons a giant vermin that appears and obeys your commands for 1 minute (as if summoned by summon  Amber Amulet of Vermin Vermin Giant bee Giant queen ant Giant praying mantis Huge monstrous centipede Huge monstrous scorpion Large monstrous spider Giant wasp Giant stag beetle  CL 7th 10th 10th 10th 10th 10th 15th 19th  nature’s ally). At the end of this duration, the creature vanishes. Eight varieties of the amber amulet of vermin exist (see the table for the details of each version). An amber amulet of vermin works once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, giant vermin. Cost to Create: Varies.  AMULET OF AQUATIC SALVATION Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This small pendant contains a perfect sphere of aquamarine hung from a blue metal chain. These necklaces are boons to sailors and spelunkers alike, because they prevent accidental drowning. When activated, an amulet of aquatic salvation grants you the ability to breathe water (as the water breathing spell) for 5 rounds. An amulet of aquatic salvation functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, water breathing. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  AMULET OF CATAPSI Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: — This crimson-tinted metal amulet is rimmed with dozens of copper pyramids. It hums cheerfully when grasped. When activated, this amulet emits a 30-footradius area of telepathic noise, centered on  Aura Moderate (DC 17) Moderate (DC 20) Moderate (DC 20) Moderate (DC 20) Moderate (DC 20) Moderate (DC 20) Strong (DC 22) Strong (DC 24)  Market Price (Item Level) 500 gp (3rd) 700 gp (3rd) 700 gp (3rd) 700 gp (3rd) 700 gp (3rd) 700 gp (3rd) 800 gp (3rd) 1,200 gp (4th)  you, for 9 rounds. If any creature in this area (including you) attempts to manifest a power, it must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or pay 4 more points than it otherwise would for that power manifestation. The limit on the number of power points a subject can spend on a power remains in effect, so a creature that fails its saving throw might not be able to manifest its highest-level powers. An amulet of catapsi functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, antimagic field or catapsi (EPH 82). Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  AMULET OF EMERGENCY HEALING Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — This globe-shaped citrine is bisected by a sturdy silver chain. The wearer of an amulet of emergency healing can provide instantaneous aid to an injured ally. When it is activated, you can heal 1d4+5 points of damage to yourself or a creature within 30 feet. You can use this effect to prevent the death of a creature reduced below –9 hit points, as long as the healing provided returns the target’s hit points to –9 or higher. (For example, you couldn’t save a creature whose hit points had been reduced to –19 or lower, since the amulet can’t provide more than 9 points of healing.) This amulet has no effect on undead creatures or creatures immune to healing spells. An amulet of emergency healing functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, close wounds (SC 48). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  68  620_10762_Chp3.indd 68  12/21/06 5:35:15 AM  AMULET OF FORTUNE PREVAILING Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 2,100 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This ornate silver necklace is set with a brilliant, blue stone.  This platinum amulet is set with seven red garnets. This amulet protects you from spells and effects that would significantly change your bodily form or composition. Whenever you are the target of such an effect, you can expend 1 charge to negate the transformation. You must decide whether to use the charge before you attempt a saving throw. Effects that the amulet protects against include, but are not limited to, polymorph, petrification, the touch of an aboleth’s tentacle, and the attack of a chaos beast. An amulet of inviolate form has 7 charges when created, one for each garnet. Each  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  CLOTHING  AMULET OF INCARNUM SHIELDING  Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb.  AMULET OF RETRIBUTIVE HEALING  This strand of ceramic beads is painted with sedate earth tones. Devoting your life to healing is often a thankless job. An amulet of retributive healing ensures that if you tend to your allies, you are renewed in turn. When you activate your amulet, the next effect you use before the end of your turn that heals another creature’s damage also heals you of an equal amount, as long as you could be healed by that same effect. If the effect heals multiple creatures, you only gain the retributive healing once per effect. For example, a human cleric casting cure light wounds on an ally after activating this amulet would gain the same amount of healing, but a human wizard casting repair light damage on her warforged ally would not benefit from activating the amulet (since that spell only affects constructs).  Illus. by E. Widermann  You can activate an amulet of fortune prevailing to reroll a saving throw. You must activate this ability before the success or failure of the saving throw has been determined, and you must use the second result, even if it’s lower. You can’t use this ability if you have already rerolled the save for any reason. An amulet of fortune prevailing functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, break enchantment. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  AMULET OF INVIOLATE FORM  time a charge is expended, one garnet turns a dull black color. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, break enchantment. Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days.  CHAPTER 3  This delicate gold amulet is suspended from a fine gold chain and set with three aventurines.  While you wear an amulet of incarnum shielding, you are immune to any effect that would drain your incarnum or unshape one of your soulmelds. An amulet of incarnum shielding has 7 charges when created. Each time your amulet negates an effect, it expends 1 charge. When an amulet loses its last charge, it crumbles into dust. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, must have an essentia pool. Cost to Create: 1,050 gp, 84 XP, 3 days.  Amulet of second chances  Amber amulet of vermin  Amulet of retributive healing Amulet of emergency healing  Amulet of wordtwisting  620_10762_Chp3.indd 69  69  12/21/06 5:35:18 AM  An amulet of retributive healing functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mass cure light wounds. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  AMULET OF SECOND CHANCES CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 40,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Illus. by W. England  This tiny, golden hourglass hangs from a thin mithral chain. An amulet of second chances gives you the ability to reverse disastrous choices. When you activate the amulet, you undo all the events of your current turn and begin the turn again. This includes moving yourself and any other creatures back to the positions they occupied at the start of your turn, removing any damage or other conditions (harmful or beneficial) that have occurred during your turn (to yourself or others), and in all other ways “resetting” events. All affected creatures are aware of the events of the now-nonexistent round, but they are free to make entirely different choices from the ones they originally made. An amulet of second chances functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, time stop or time regression (EPH 138). Cost to Create: 20,000 gp, 1,600 XP, 40 days.  AMULET OF TEAMWORK  In addition, you can activate the amulet to grant both you and an adjacent ally a +5 competence bonus to AC for 1 round. You must be adjacent to an ally to activate this power. This ability can be used once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, heroism. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  AMULET OF TEARS Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 4th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — Adorning a glossy silver chain, a spiral of pearl teardrops circles a colorless crystal sphere. An amulet of tears has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges when you activate the amulet grants you temporary hit points, as described below. These hit points last for up to 10 minutes; they don’t stack with any other temporary hit points. 1 charge: 12 temporary hit points. 2 charges: 18 temporary hit points. 3 charges: 24 temporary hit points. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, aid. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  AMULET OF TOXIN DELAY  Incarnum items: ring of soulbound protection, ring of essentia, Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Price (Item Level): 400 gp cloak of soulbound resistance, amulet of incarnum shielding, Body Slot: Throat (2nd) glove of incarnum theft Caster Level: 3rd Body Slot: Throat Aura: Faint; (DC 16) enchantment Caster Level: 3rd you successfully use the aid another Activation: — and swift (command) Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration action, the bonus granted to your ally Weight: — Activation: Immediate (command) improves from +2 to +3. When you flank Weight: — an enemy, you and any allies also flanking This silver chain comes together in the form of that creature gain a +2 bonus on damage a pair of linked hands. The transparent crystal hanging from this rolls. These are continuous effects and necklace contains several drops of viscous require no activation. An amulet of teamwork allows you to work green fluid. more effectively as part of a team. When  70  620_10762_Chp3.indd 70  12/21/06 5:35:22 AM  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — Strips of torn and knotted scrolls seem to make up this amulet. You can discern a few letters in red ink on the tightly rolled parchment, but these symbols are warped and meaningless.  Mesmerist’s gloves  This winged mithral helm shines in the light like a priceless heirloom. An angelhelm allows a good-aligned wearer to emulate certain traits of celestial beings. Your melee attacks are treated as good-aligned weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, your angelhelm allows you to use cure critical wounds, dispel evil (DC 17), and resist energy (acid or cold only) as spell-like abilities each once per day. The helm grants no benefit to nongood wearers. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dispel evil, cure critical wounds, resist energy, good alignment. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  ANKH OF ASCENSION Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) conjuration Activation: Free (command) Weight: 3 lb. Crudely carved from splintering wood and dangling from frayed twine, this simple ankh looks brittle and ancient.  ANKLET OF TRANSLOCATION Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — A pewter chime hangs from this simple leather ankle-band. An anklet of translocation allows you to make short dimensional hops. When it is activated, you can instantly teleport (with no chance of error) up to 10 feet. The new space must be within line of sight and line of effect. You can’t use the anklet to move into a space occupied by another creature, nor can you teleport into a solid object; if you attempt to do so, the anklet’s activation is wasted. You can bring along objects weighing up to your maximum load, but you can’t bring another creature with you. An anklet of translocation functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  Illus. by B. Hagan  An amulet of wordtwisting grants you a +2 insight bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, Intimidate, and Sense Motive checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. If you are an orc wearing an amulet of wordtwisting, you instead gain a +4 insight bonus on the indicated skill checks. In addition, once per day, you can activate a tongues effect on yourself (as the spell). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, tongues. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  When you activate an ankh of ascension, you must sacrifice a prepared divine spell or divine spell slot. The caster level of any divine spells of that level or lower that you cast before your next turn increases by 4. An ankh of ascension functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, gate. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  CLOTHING  AMULET OF WORDTWISTING  ANGELHELM  CHAPTER 3  When you activate an amulet of toxin delay, it creates a delay poison effect on you (as the spell, but with a duration of only 2 rounds). You can activate this item whenever you would be required to attempt a saving throw against poison (before rolling the save). An amulet of toxin delay functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, delay poison. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day.  Badge of the svirfneblin Ankh of ascension  Adamantine mind blade gauntlets  71  620_10762_Chp3.indd 71  12/21/06 5:35:27 AM  ARCANIST’S GLOVES Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  These sleek blue gloves bear tiny golden stars across the knuckles.  CLOTHING  When you activate arcanist’s gloves, you add 2 to the caster level of the next 1stlevel arcane spell you cast before the end of your turn. Arcanist’s gloves function two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fox’s cunning. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Illus. by S. Ellis  ARMBAND OF ELUSIVE ACTION Price (Item Level): 800 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This solid gold band is polished to a bright shine. An armband of elusive action allows you to protect yourself from the hazards of battlefield chaos. When it is activated, the band allows you to avoid provoking a single attack of opportunity that your actions would otherwise incur. An armband of elusive action functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace or evade attack (CP 89). Cost to Create: 400 gp, 32 XP, 1 day.  ARMBAND OF MAXIMIZED HEALING Price (Item Level): 7,200 gp (11th) Body Slot: Arms  72  620_10762_Chp3.indd 72  Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) conjuration Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. Numerous small diamonds adorn this silver armband like tiny constellations. When you activate an armband of maximized healing, the next healing spell of 6th level or lower that you cast on your turn is automatically maximized (as the Maximize Spell feat, but with no adjustment to spell level or casting time). An armband of maximized healing functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Maximize Spell, heal. Cost to Create: 3,600 gp, 288 XP, 8 days.  ARMBANDS OF MIGHT Price (Item Level): 4,100 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These bronze armbands are engraved with images of bulls’ horns. When you wear these armbands, you gain a +2 bonus on Strength checks and Strength-based skill checks. If you have the Power Attack feat, you also gain a +2 bonus on melee damage rolls for any attack on which you use the Power Attack feat and take a penalty of at least –2 on your attack roll. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 2,050 gp, 164 XP, 5 days.  This glass lens is rimmed with gold and has a fine gold chain attached to an ear clip. Putting on a monocle is a standard action. While wearing an artificer’s monocle, whenever you successfully use your artificer knowledge class feature (ECS 31) to detect an item’s magical aura or you cast detect magic and have at least 5 ranks of Knowledge (arcana), you can spend 1 additional minute studying the item. If you do, you can identify the abilities of that item as if you had cast identify upon it. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, identify, artificer knowledge or Knowledge (arcana) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  BADGE OF THE SVIRFNEBLIN Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) illusion, transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — This brooch is little more than a hunk of gray rock studded with a number of colorful, uncut gems and wrapped in tarnished metal wire. While wearing this item, you gain darkvision out to 30 feet and a +5 competence bonus on Hide checks. These are continuous effects and require no activation. Once per day, you can activate the badge to give yourself a blur effect (as the spell). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, blur, darkvision, svirfneblin. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  HELM ARTIFICER’S MONOCLE BEAR Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: See text Weight: —  Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  Artiﬁcer’s monocle  12/21/06 5:35:31 AM  This large helmet is wrapped in the hide of a bear’s head, with metal teeth worked into its visor.  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — This leather belt bears a platinum buckle set with three small black pearls.  Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  These strange crowns can shoot rays from eyelike gems, much like the attacks of their namesake. Each gem can fire a different ray a single time at a target (doing this burns out the gem). Each ray extends up to 30 feet and requires a ranged touch attack to successfully strike a target. Each ray functions as a particular spell (though the ray only affects a single target): • charm monster (Will DC 17 negates) • charm person (Will DC 17 negates) • deep slumber (Will DC 17 negates) • disintegrate (Fort DC 17 partial) • fear (Will DC 17 partial) • finger of death (Fort DC 17 partial) • flesh to stone (Fort DC 17 negates) • inflict moderate wounds (Will DC 17 half) • slow (Will DC 17 negates) • telekinesis (violent thrust against a target of up to 325 pounds; Will DC 17 negates) Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, charm monster, charm person, deep slumber, disintegrate, fear, finger of death, flesh to stone, inflict moderate wounds, slow, telekinesis. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  Beholder crown  A belt of battle helps you avoid being caught off guard in combat and allows occasional bursts of extra activity. While worn, it grants you a +2 competence bonus on initiative checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, a belt of battle has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Each time you activate the belt, one of the black pearls set into its buckle turns white. The pearls return to normal when the ring’s charges renew. Spending 1 or more charges grants you an extra action, which must be taken immediately (before you take any other action). 1 charge: 1 move action. 2 charges: 1 standard action. 3 charges: 1 full-round action. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  This belt is forged of thick golden links, each set with a cabochon-cut semiprecious stone. Its large, oval buckle is embossed with the closed fist of Kord. These gem-studded belts are sacred to followers of Kord, the god of strength. When you wear one of these items, it functions as a belt of giant strength +2 if you are chaotic good, neutral good, or chaotic neutral. All of Kord’s followers vie for the honor of winning one of these items, and each belt is passed down through generations of his faithful. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Strength checks and a +4 morale bonus on saves against fear effects while wearing a belt of the champion. If you ever fail a save against a fear effect while wearing this belt, its relic power is negated for 1 hour. To use the relic power, you must worship Kord and either sacrifice a 3rd-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 5 HD. Lore: The first belt of the champion was forged by a priest of Kord in a tiny village for a traveling hero who, having failed to persuade the villagers to flee before a horde of orcs, offered to stay and defend them. Each decade since then, Kord has given one of these belts to a favorite follower (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  Illus. by C. Critchlow  Ten metal stalks sprout from this grotesquely formed bronze crown. At the tip of each stalk, a different gem gazes like a glistening eye.  Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  CLOTHING  BEHOLDER CROWN  BELT OF THE CHAMPION [RELIC]  CHAPTER 3  While raging, you can halve the damage dealt by a single sneak attack or critical hit scored against you. You can activate this item after the damage from the attack has been determined. A bear helm functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  BELT OF BATTLE  BELT OF GROWTH Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This thick brass belt looks like it is riddled with cracks. It bends as though it has been stretched out of shape. When you activate a belt of growth, you instantly increase in size (as if affected  73  620_10762_Chp3.indd 73  12/21/06 5:35:33 AM  by enlarge person). This effect lasts for 10 minutes or until you command it to end. This ability doesn’t stack with any other effect that increases your size. A belt of growth functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, enlarge person. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  Belt of battle  The buckle of this wide leather belt is set with a single blood-red carbuncle. Activating a belt of one mighty blow grants extra damage on your next melee attack made before the end of your turn. A light weapon deals an extra 1d8 points of damage, a one-handed weapon deals an extra 2d6 points of damage, and a twohanded weapon deals an extra 3d6 points of damage. A belt of one mighty blow functions once Belt of growth per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  BELT OF HIDDEN POUCHES Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Move (command); see text Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by C. Critchlow  Ten tiny pockets run along the inside of this otherwise unremarkable leather belt.  74  Hidden inside this belt are ten small pockets, each of which seems big enough to hold only a few coins. Each pocket actually functions as a small bag of holding and can hold up to 1/2 cubic foot or 5 pounds of nonliving matter. No object with any dimension exceeding 6 inches can be placed in a pocket. Anything placed inside a pocket effectively has one-tenth its normal weight, so a full pocket weighs only 1/2 pound at most. In addition, two secret pockets lie behind each visible one, for a total of thirty pockets in all. The hidden pockets can be accessed only through a command word. A true seeing spell reveals the presence of the hidden pockets but not the command word needed to open them. Even when a pocket is full, it never bulges, so a belt of hidden pouches stuffed with 150 pounds of items still looks like an ordinary belt. To place any object in the belt, you merely press the object into the belt. Doing so while speaking the command word places the object in one of the hidden pockets (if one of them is empty). Placing an item in a pocket (hidden or visible) is a move action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. Naming a stored object and speaking a second command word draws the named object out of the belt and places it in your hand. Doing this is a move action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. You can also reach into one of the ten regular hidden pockets and draw out an item, just as if retrieving a stored object (a move action that provokes attacks of opportunity). A casual search won’t reveal any objects placed in the belt, and searching the  620_10762_Chp3.indd 74  Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  BELT OF PRIESTLY MIGHT Belt of one mighty blow  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. A prominent, yet worn, holy symbol adorns this threadbare cloth sash.  This belt features a deity’s holy symbol. Belt of priestly might Followers of that deity or anyone of that deity’s alignment can wear the belt safely. Any other creature gains one negative level when wearing the belt. The negative level remains for as long as the belt is worn. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the belt is worn. While wearing the belt, you gain a Belt of ultimate athleticism +1 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature visible pockets cannot reveal anything without natural armor has an effective stored in the hidden pockets. It is possible natural armor bonus of +0.) The belt also to use a Sleight of Hand check to pluck grants you a +2 enhancement bonus to something out of one of the ten visible Strength. pockets, but only someone wearing or Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, holding a belt can access the hidden barkskin, bull’s strength. pockets, and then only with the correct Cost to Create: 3,000 gp 240 XP, 6 days. command word. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Leomund’s secret chest. BELT OF Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days. THEFT-HEALING  BELT OF ONE MIGHTY BLOW Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 5th  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 1 lb.  12/21/06 5:35:36 AM  This supple brown leather belt has a silver buckle engraved with numerous tiny magical runes.  Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This black leather eyepatch bears a blood-red pentagram. When you activate a blighter’s hex-eye, your melee attacks against elves and creatures of the plant type deal an extra 2d6 points of damage. This effect lasts for 1 round. A hex-eye functions three times per day, but it can’t be activated in consecutive rounds.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 75  CLOTHING  Golden lightning bolts are embroidered along the sleeves of this sturdy tunic of blue linen. Bolt shirt  BLINDFOLD OF TRUE DARKNESS Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: — This black, silky piece of cloth is completely opaque when held up to the light. When you wear this blindfold, you gain the blindsight ability out to 30 feet (MM 306). Because your eyes are protected, you are also immune to gaze attacks and spells or effects that rely on sight. You cannot use vision in any way while wearing the blindfold. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, see invisibility. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  BLINDHELM Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 11th Aura: Strong; (DC 20) divination  You can teleport (with no chance of error) to any location within 60 feet, as long as you have both line of sight and line of effect to that destination. A harmless trail of crackling sparks traces the path from your original location to your destination, making it obvious where you have landed. You can’t use the shirt to move into a space occupied by another creature, nor can you teleport into a solid object; if you attempt to do so, the shirt’s activation is wasted. You can bring along objects weighing up to your maximum load, but you can’t bring another creature with you. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  Illus. by E. Cox  BLIGHTER’S HEX-EYE  Despite its appearance and name, a blindhelm doesn’t restrict your vision in any way. More important, it grants you blindsense out to 5 feet and provides you with a +5 competence bonus on saves against gaze attacks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true seeing. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Move (command) Weight: —  This simple cloth belt is a braid of black, green, and gold threads. A belt of ultimate athleticism allows you to reliably perform normal athletic feats, or occasionally pull off a truly amazing stunt. When you activate the belt, you can take 10 on all Balance, Climb, Jump, Swim, and Tumble checks made in that round, even if you are in a stressful situation. In addition, once per day, you can activate the belt to treat the next Balance, Climb, Jump, Swim, or Tumble check you attempt as if you had rolled a 20. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 1,800 gp, 144 XP, 4 days.  This helm’s face is a solid slab of iron, apparently allowing its wearer no way to see out.  BOLT SHIRT  BELT OF ULTIMATE ATHLETICISM Price (Item Level): 3,600 gp (8th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb.  CHAPTER 3  Designed and used by spellthieves (CAd 13), belts of theft-healing heighten the payoff of stealing spells. When you steal a spell or spell-like ability from an unwilling target, you can activate the belt to also heal damage equal to the level of the spell or spell-like ability stolen. A belt of theft-healing functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bear’s endurance, steal spell. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Lore: Gruumsh, god of orcs, gave his shamans the knowledge to craft the first blighter’s hex-eye to help his people clear the woodlands of their enemies (Knowledge [history or religion] DC 15). Elves joke that the orcs are so stupid that Gruumsh has to teach every new generation the secrets of the eyepatch’s construction again (Knowledge [history or religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, keen edge. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  BONE RING Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — Weight: — Seemingly fragile and nearly weightless, this ring appears to be a single long finger bone, bleached white and somehow bent into a circle. While wearing a bone ring, you are protected from energy drain and ability drain (but not ability damage). A bone ring has  75  12/21/06 5:35:40 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Every negative level or point of ability drain prevented uses 1 charge. For example, a successful slam attack from a vampire, which normally bestows two negative levels, instead drains 2 charges from the ring. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, negative Boots of energy protection. agile leaping Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  Boots of swift passage  Boots of sidestepping  BOOTS OF THE BATTLE CHARGER  BOOTS OF AGILE LEAPING Price (Item Level): 600 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb.  Illus. by D. Martin & F. Vohwinkel  76  620_10762_Chp3.indd 76  BOOTS OF BIG STEPPING  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 2 lb.  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  These heavy leather boots bear thick copper bands just above the ankle.  These wolfhide boots are secured with leather thongs that wrap twice about the ankle. The fur is exceptionally soft and has a faint sheen that makes the boots appear to shimmer in the light.  These crocodile-skin boots feel slightly elastic. While wearing boots of agile leaping, you can add your Dexterity modifier (instead of your Strength modifier) on Jump checks. If you have at least 5 ranks in Balance, you can stand from prone as a swift action. When standing from prone, you do not provoke attacks of opportunity. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 300 gp, 24 XP, 1 day.  difficult terrain and through squares occupied by allies when making a charge after activating the boots. You can use this ability two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace, longstrider. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  When activated, boots of the battle charger allow you to make a charge attack as a standard action (rather than a full-round action), though the charge only includes movement up to your speed (rather than double your speed). You must make the charge attack in the round you activate the boots, or the effect is lost. If you also wear a magic item that grants an enhancement bonus to your Dexterity score, you can move across  The spirit of a blink dog has been harnessed within these boots. While you are wearing these boots, your caster level for all teleportation spells is increased by 2. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, when you speak the command word, you can teleport up to 60  Regdar tests out boots of stomping, boots of the battle charger, boots of big stepping, sandals of springing, sandals of sprinting, and boots of dragonstriding  12/21/06 5:35:43 AM  feet with no chance for error, as if using a greater teleport spell. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  BOOTS OF DESPERATION  You gain a +2 competence bonus on Climb and Jump checks while wearing these boots. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Once per day, you can activate boots of dragonstriding to gain a climb speed equal to your land speed for 10 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, jump, spider climb. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  BOOTS OF JUMPING Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 2 lb.  BOOTS OF LANDING Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Tordek shops for new boots, trying out rock boots, boots of the mountain king, steadfast boots, boots of tremorsense, and boots of landing  620_10762_Chp3.indd 77  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  You can activate boots of desperation only when your current hit point total is equal to or less than half your full normal hit points. When activated, the boots grant a +30-foot enhancement bonus to your base speed and a +5 dodge bonus to AC against attacks of opportunity. These benefits last for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, expeditious retreat. Cost to Create: 1,400 gp, 112 XP, 3 days.  These boots have a scaly look, as though they were made from reptile hide.  Boots of jumping allow you to jump exceptionally long distances. You only need to move at least 10 feet in a straight line to attempt a running jump (rather than 20 feet). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, boots of jumping have 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you a competence bonus on Jump checks for 1 round. 1 charge: Gain a +10 competence bonus on Jump checks. 2 charges: Gain a +15 competence bonus on Jump checks. 3 charges: Gain a +20 competence bonus on Jump checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, jump. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  CLOTHING  These soft-soled boots look comfortable and quiet.  Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  These comfortable, black leather boots have unusually springy soles.  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 2,800 gp (7th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  BOOTS OF DRAGONSTRIDING  77  12/21/06 5:35:49 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  These light blue leather boots have very thick soles. Walking in them is like dancing in clouds. While wearing boots of landing, you land on your feet no matter how far you fall, and you take 2 fewer dice of damage from the fall than normal (thus, a fall of 20 feet or less deals you no damage). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, feather fall or catfall (EPH 82). Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  BOOTS OF THE MOUNTAIN KING Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These iron-shod red leather boots appear rugged and worn. While wearing boots of the mountain king, you can move more easily than usual over rough and difficult terrain. These boots allow you to ignore increased movement costs and skill check DC increases for light and dense rubble. In addition, you can move up stairs and slopes at normal speed and run or charge downhill without making a Balance check (DMG 89). These boots require no activation. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of movement. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  BOOTS OF THE MOUNTAIN KING, GREATER Price (Item Level): 21,500 gp (15th) Activation: — and swift (command) This rough-looking boots are made of craggy leather that resembles a rough granite cliff face, and they are shod with thick iron. These boots function as boots of the mountain king. In addition, you can activate greater boots to gain the benefit of a stoneskin spell. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of movement, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 10,750 gp, 860 XP, 22 days.  BOOTS OF SIDESTEPPING Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — These soft leather boots are adorned with a copper chain around the ankle. Boots of sidestepping allow you to slide out of range of an enemy’s attacks. When you activate the boots, you can take a 5-foot step (PH 144). Unlike a normal 5-foot step, you can take this action even if you have already moved during the round, and it doesn’t prevent you from moving again afterward (or even taking your normal 5-foot step). For example, you could activate the boots to move 5 feet away from an adjacent monster, spend a move action to move another 20 feet away, then take a standard action. Boots of sidestepping function three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  BOOTS OF SKATING Price (Item Level): 7,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 15) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These white leather boots extend to mid-calf and lace up from toe to top. They sport two dull metal edges that slant downward from the bottom of each side. These boots allow you to slide along the ground as if on smooth ice. You can gracefully skate along the ground, turn, or stop suddenly as desired. You gain a +10-foot enhancement bonus to your land speed while wearing the boots. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Skating up an incline removes the bonus to speed, while skating down a decline increases the boots’ enhancement bonus to land speed by an additional 10 feet. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, expeditious retreat or skate (EPH 132). Cost to Create: 3,500 gp, 280 XP, 7 days.  BOOTS OF STOMPING Price (Item Level): 600 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb. The thick metal soles of these dirt-brown boots are slightly wider than the vamp. Brassy metal bands run from the sides of the soles to the tops. When you stomp your feet and activate boots of stomping, you generate a 15-footlong cone-shaped burst of psychokinetic force that travels along the ground, toppling creatures and loose objects. The shock wave affects only creatures standing on the ground within the area. Creatures that fail a DC 13 Reflex save are thrown to the ground, prone, and take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage. Boots of stomping function three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, sonic blast (SC 195) or stomp (EPH 133). Cost to Create: 300 gp, 24 XP, 1 day.  BOOTS OF SWIFT PASSAGE Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Move (command) Weight: 1 lb. These comfortable high boots are made from deep red leather with brilliant copper-colored leather soles. When activated, boots of swift passage teleport you up to 20 feet in any direction (with no chance of error). You must have line of sight and line of effect to your destination to use the boots. You can’t use the boots to move into a space occupied by another creature, nor can you teleport into a solid object; if you attempt to do so, the boots’ activation is wasted. You can bring along objects weighing up to your maximum load, but you can’t bring another creature with you. Boots of swift passage function five times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  78  620_10762_Chp3.indd 78  12/21/06 5:35:53 AM  These serviceable black leather boots always seem to bear the dust of the road, regardless of your efforts to clean them.  BOOTS OF TEMPORAL ACCELERATION Price (Item Level): 43,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) illusion Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. These pale green boots are slim and elegant, with perfectly smooth soles. When you wear these boots, you leave no tracks (as if affected by pass without trace).  This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Once per day, you can activate the boots to become invisible (as greater invisibility) for 7 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater invisibility, pass without trace. Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days.  BOOTS OF TREMORSENSE Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. The soles of these black boots are unusually wide and their shape strangely cylindrical, like the feet of an elephant. When you activate boots of tremorsense, you gain tremorsense out to 30 feet for 5 rounds. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, tremorsense. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  BOOTS OF THE UNENDING JOURNEY [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  CLOTHING  BOOTS OF TRACKLESSNESS  Boots of the unending journey  Illus. by B. Hagan  Once per day, you can enter another time frame for 2 rounds, speeding up so greatly that all other creatures seem frozen, though they are actually moving at normal speed. Other creatures are normally immune to your attacks, powers, or spells, but if you create an area effect that lasts longer than 2 rounds, that effect applies normally once the duration of the item’s effect expires. While under the effect of the boots, you cannot enter an area protected by an antimagic field, null psionics field, or by a spell or power that neutralizes 9th-level spells or powers. Normal and magical fire, cold, acid, and the like can still harm you. Except as described here, this effect functions as a time stop spell. When the duration expires, you resume acting during your current turn in normal time, but you are shaken for 1 round. Splintered or partitioned minds within your own mind, such as might be in effect through the use of psionic powers such as schism, are not temporally sped up, even if your second mind manifested this power. Your primary mind gains the benefit, while your second mind remains stuck in the standard time frame. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, time stop or temporal acceleration (EPH 136). Cost to Create: 21,500 gp, 1,720 XP, 43 days.  CHAPTER 3  These dark leather boots feature a small image of a sundial sewn into each side. When worn, they pulse slightly once every second.  Travel is a way of life for the followers of Fharlanghn, and these boots give his chosen followers a spring in their step. While wearing boots of the unending journey, you gain a +10-foot enhancement bonus to your speed if you are neutral good, lawful neutral, neutral, chaotic neutral, or neutral evil. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you are constantly under a pass without trace effect. Boots of the unending journey also render you immune to the effects of fatigue and exhaustion. These are continuous effects and require no activation. To use the relic power, you must worship Fharlanghn and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. Lore: The first pair of these boots was made by an adventurer who had grown too old to travel without magical aid. When she died, the boots were offered to the god Fharlanghn, who wore them himself in his earthly travels. It is said that once per century, Fharlanghn gives his pair of boots of the unending journey to a fellow traveler, then endows an ordinary cobbler with the power to make him a new pair (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, restoration, pass without trace. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  BRACERS OF ACCURACY Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. Each of these bronze bracers is engraved with an image of an open eye. Wearing bracers of accuracy allows you to make ranged attacks with extreme precision. The bracers have 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants a benefit to all ranged attacks you make before the end of your turn. 1 charge: Ignore AC bonus from cover (except total cover) for all targets.  79  620_10762_Chp3.indd 79  12/21/06 5:35:55 AM  CHAPTER 3  CLOTHING  Bracers of dawn  2 charges: Ignore miss chance from concealment (except total concealment), including miss chances from effects such as blur or displacement (but not incorporeality), for all targets. 3 charges: Ignore both cover and concealment (as previous entries) for all targets. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairaudience/clairvoyance. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by D. Martin  BRACERS OF ARCANE FREEDOM Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. These ornate blue leather armbands are stitched with depictions of golden eagles in flight. Bracers of arcane freedom allow you to cast arcane spells without the normal complex gestures required. When you activate these bracers, you omit the somatic component of the next arcane spell you cast before the end of your turn (as if applying the Still Spell feat to it, but without altering the spell’s level or casting time). This effect functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of movement. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  BRACERS OF THE BLAST BARRIER Price (Item Level): 3,200 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. These silver and red bracers are set with round, jet-black stones.  Bracers of the blast barrier allow you to turn a spell or spell-like ability into a temporary wall of magical energy. When you activate these bracers, the next spell you cast or spell-like ability you use before the end of your turn instead appears as a 10-footlong, 10-foot-high opaque wall that lasts for 1 round per level of the spell. One end of the wall must be placed at any corner of your space, and the wall can extend in any direction. The wall must be continuous and unbroken when created. If its surface is broken by any object or creature, the wall fails to form and the spell and activation are lost. Any creature passing through the wall takes damage equal to that normally dealt by the spell or spell-like ability (with a minimum of 1 point per level of the spell or spell-like ability). A successful Reflex save (using the normal save DC for a spell of that level cast by you) halves this damage. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, wall of fire. Cost to Create: 1,600 gp, 128 XP, 4 days.  BRACERS OF DAWN Price (Item Level): 26,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Move (manipulation) and standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb. These leather bracers are set with brass studs. One of the pair also features a lens-and-dial contraption. When you turn the dial to the left, both bracers appear normal. When you turn the dial to the middle position, a beam of light emerges from the lens, illuminating your surroundings as a bullseye lantern would. Turning the dial to the left or back to the middle is a move action.  Four times per day, you can turn the dial to the right position as a standard action and aim the lens at a target, unleashing a searing light effect (as the spell). The dial automatically returns to the middle position after each use of this ability. Even though only one bracer is equipped with the lens-and-dial apparatus, both must be worn for the magic to be effective. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, searing light. Cost to Create: 13,000 gp, 1,040 XP, 26 days.  BRACERS OF THE ENTANGLING BLAST Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. Each of these jet black bracers is set with an oval of tiny, ruby-red stones. Bracers of the entangling blast allow you to reduce the damage dealt by your magic to ensnare those affected by it. When you activate these bracers, the next spell you cast or spell-like ability you use deals only half its normal damage; however, any creature damaged by the spell becomes entangled for 1d3 rounds, taking an additional 1 point of damage per level of the spell each round on your turn. This damage is of the same type as normally dealt by the spell (or your choice if the spell deals more than one type of damage). These bracers have no effect on a spell or spell-like ability that doesn’t deal damage. This ability function three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, web. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 100 XP, 2 days.  BRACERS OF GREAT COLLISION Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Moderate; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: — These thick platinum armbands are etched with a pattern of crossed hammers.  80  620_10762_Chp3.indd 80  12/21/06 5:35:58 AM  Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — and immediate (mental) Weight: 1/2 lb.  Bracers of opportunity allow you to take advantage of opponents who let down their defenses. If you have the Combat Reflexes feat, you gain a +2 competence bonus on any attack of opportunity you make (whether the attack of opportunity is granted by the bracers or not). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate these bracers, you can take an attack of  Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. Each of these mithral bracers bears an image of a needle-sharp dagger. When you activate bracers of quick strike, you can make one extra attack with any weapon you are holding if you already made a full attack on this turn. This attack is made at your full base attack bonus, plus any modifiers appropriate to the situation. This effect is not cumulative with any other effect that grants you an extra attack when making a full attack, such as the Rapid Shot feat, a speed weapon, or the haste spell. Bracers of quick strike function once per day.  BRACERS OF REPULSION Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — Each of these steel bracers bears an oval of smoky quartz carved with the image of an upraised hand. Bracers of repulsion produce an instantaneous wave of force that pushes back enemies. When you activate the bracers, all enemies within 10 feet must succeed on a DC 19 Fortitude save or be pushed 5 feet away from you. Huge and larger creatures are unaffected by bracers of repulsion, though incorporeal creatures can be affected. This ability functions three times per day.  Illus. by D. Martin  These matching leather wristbands feel light but strong.  BRACERS OF QUICK STRIKE  You must wear bracers of quick strike for 24 hours before you can access their abilities. If you take them off, they become inactive until worn for an additional 24 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  CLOTHING  BRACERS OF OPPORTUNITY  opportunity granted to you by an opponent, even if you have already reached your normal limit of attacks of opportunity in the round. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Combat Reflexes, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  CHAPTER 3  Bracers of great collision allow you to deliver particularly crushing attacks with bludgeoning weapons. When you score a successful critical hit with a bludgeoning melee weapon, you can activate the bracers to deal an extra 2d6 points of damage with that attack (or 3d6 points of damage if you wield the weapon with two hands). You must activate the bracers before you roll damage for the critical hit. Bracers of great collision function two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater magic weapon, keen edge. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  Bracers of arcane freedom Armbands of might  Bracers of retaliation  Bracers of accuracy  Bracers of great collision  81  620_10762_Chp3.indd 81  12/21/06 5:36:01 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Bigby’s forceful hand. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  effects function continuously while the bracers are activated. You can suppress the winds about you by uttering “calm” in Auran, although doing so also suppresses the benefits the bracers bestow. You can reactivate the bracers by saying “zephyr” while focusing on the etchings of the silver plates. Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Wondrous Item, planar binding. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Brawler’s gauntlets  BRACERS OF RETALIATION  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) enchantment Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by J. Zhang  These hard leather armguards look sturdy, yet flexible.  Brute gauntlets  Bracers of retaliation protect you from attacks and punish attackers for injuring you. They grant you a +1 armor bonus to AC (as bracers of armor). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, when you are dealt damage by a melee attack, you can activate the bracers and sacrifice an arcane spell or spell slot of 1st level or higher to daze your attacker for 1 round. A successful Will save (DC 10 + the level of the spell sacrificed) negates this effect. This effect functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Wondrous Item, daze monster, mage armor. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  Wrestlers and priests of the brawler god Kord prize these gauntlets. When activated, for 1 round, they grant you a +2 bonus on grapple checks and damage rolls when making unarmed attacks. Brawler’s gauntlets function three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  BROOCH OF AVOIDANCE Hellcat gauntlets  These bracers consist of silver plates that can be attached to a person’s forearms by ornate leather straps. An etching on their surface echoes the swirls within crystal shards set just above the wrists. Bracers of wind continuously emit a faint breeze, occasionally billowing your cloak or hair. Upon their activation, the winds around you swell and surge, imposing a –2 penalty on ranged attacks made against you, as if fired in a strong wind (DMG 95). Siege weapons, thrown boulders, and the like are unaffected. This effect does not stack if the wind in the area is already strong or greater. In addition, when you use a ranged weapon, you gain a +1 competence bonus on the attack roll. These  Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 2 lb. The iron links and leather grips of these gauntlets are rough and worn from hard use.  BRACERS OF WIND Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  BRAWLER’S GAUNTLETS  Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — This brooch features a square, pale green crystal in a plain gold setting.  Finned gauntlets  A brooch of avoidance allows you to better escape attacks of opportunity. When activated, it grants you a +4 dodge bonus against attacks of opportunity until the end of your turn. A brooch of avoidance functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  82  620_10762_Chp3.indd 82  12/21/06 5:36:05 AM  BROOCH OF STABILITY Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: — Weight: — This runed silver brooch shows signs of considerable use.  This pair of heavy black leather gauntlets is set with metal studs. Brute gauntlets allow you to temporarily increase your physical might. These gauntlets have 3 charges, which are renewed each  This silver ring is set with a sapphire carved in the form of a crude fist. A brute ring allows you to push another creature away from you with pure force. When you activate the ring, a blast of force issues forth, making a bull rush attack against a single creature up to 30 feet from you. You can use either the ring’s check modifer (+5) or your own bull rush check modifier, whichever is higher. As a force effect, this ability affects incorporeal creatures. A brute ring functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, telekinesis. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  Thousands of strange pores cover this robe of thick green cloth, making it look like the parched skin of some desert plant. A burnoose of 1,001 thorns grants you a +1 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) You also gain a +4 bonus on saves to resist becoming dehydrated from heat or exposure (but gain no protection from desiccation damage, such as a horrid wilting spell, or spells that cause you to become dehydrated). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When activated, a burnoose sprouts hundreds of sharp thorns, which last for 5 rounds. Any creature that strikes you with a natural weapon or makes a grapple check against you (except to escape your grapple or pin) takes 1d6 points of piercing damage from the needles. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, skin of the cactus (Snd 120). Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  Illus. by E. Cox  Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 2 lb.  CLOTHING  BRUTE GAUNTLETS  BRUTE RING  BURNOOSE OF 1,001 THORNS  CHAPTER 3  This brooch is useful in dangerous battles. When your hit points are reduced to –1 or lower, you automatically become stable (assuming the damage wasn’t enough to kill you). A brooch of stability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure light wounds. Cost to Create: 275 gp, 22 XP, 1 day.  day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you a morale bonus on Strength checks, Strength-based skill checks, and melee weapon damage for 1 round. 1 charge: +2 morale bonus. 2 charges: +3 morale bonus. 3 charges: +4 morale bonus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Dispelling cord  Formless vest Lightning tunic Burnoose of 1,001 thorns  620_10762_Chp3.indd 83  83  12/21/06 5:36:14 AM  While in viper form, you replace all your normal statistics and special abilities with those of a typical viper of the appropriate size, except for your alignment, your hit points, your Hit Dice (for the purpose of adjudicating effects based on HD), and your ability to understand (but not speak) the languages you normally understand. Any gear worn or carried melds into the new form and becomes nonfunctional. Treat this as a polymorph effect, as defined on page 95 of Player’s Handbook II. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ability to wild shape. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  CADUCEUS BRACERS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by B. Hagan  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  These lightweight silver bracers depict a pair of intertwined, snakelike shapes. Caduceus bracers allow you to convert your innate healing powers into other forms of restorative magic. By sacrificing 5 points of healing (derived from lay on hands, wholeness of body, or any similar ability that measures your ability to heal as a daily limit of points), you can remove 1 point of ability damage or remove the dazed, fatigued, or sickened condition from one creature. Using these bracers in this manner follows all the normal limitations of your healing ability. For example, a paladin using caduceus bracers must touch the target to be affected (just as with lay on hands), while a monk wearing these bracers can affect only herself (since she can’t use wholeness of body on another creature). You can spend extra points for cumulative effect, For example, you could spend 15 points of healing to remove both the fatigued condition and 2 points of ability damage. You can also combine normal healing with the bracers’ effect. For instance, you could spend 25 points to produce the effects in the previous example and heal 10 points of damage as well. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, lesser restoration. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  CANNITH GOGGLES Price (Item Level): 13,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — and 10 minutes; see text Weight: 1/2 lb. These light orange, round, translucent lenses are mounted within a flexible metal frame that has a soft leather strap with a clasp at the back.  84  Cannith goggles grant a +5 competence bonus on Search and Spot checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, an artificer (ECS 29) can power the goggles with infusions, grant-  620_10762_Chp3.indd 84  CASTING GLOVE Casting gloves  ing them greater power. Using an infusion to power Cannith goggles requires 10 minutes and the expenditure of an infusion of the appropriate level. An infusion powers the goggles for 24 hours. Cannith goggles powered with a 1st-level infusion grant low-light vision. Powering them with a 2nd-level infusion grants the wearer low-light vision and darkvision out to 60 feet. If powered with a 3rd-level infusion, the goggles provide low-light vision and darkvision out to 120 feet. Lore: The artificers of a powerful noble family called House Cannith were tasked to find a way to enhance human vision, and the results of their research are Cannith goggles (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, hardening (ECS 112). Cost to Create: 6,500 gp, 520 XP, 13 days.  CAPE OF THE VIPER Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. This viridian cape is shot with threads of greenish metal. A cape of the viper allows you to transform into a poisonous serpent. The cape has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges transforms you into a viper for 7 rounds. 1 charge: Small viper. 2 charges: Medium viper. 3 charges: Large viper; add +2 to the save DC of your bite’s poison.  Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Free (manipulation); see text Weight: — This seamless black leather glove has small silver and gold runes around the tip of each finger. A casting glove allows you to store an item and make use of it without first retrieving it. It functions as a glove of storing (DMG 257), allowing you to store or retrieve a single item within it as a free action. In addition, once per round while wearing a casting glove, you can activate or consume a stored magic item as if you were holding it in your hand. The activation and all effects function just as normal for the item, and the activation requires the same type of action. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shrink item. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  CAT’S-EYE BROOCH Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — Weight: — This silver brooch holds a green chrysoberyl at its center, slitted with a black streak like a living cat’s eye. A cat’s-eye brooch provides you with a +1 luck bonus on all saving throws and an  12/21/06 5:36:19 AM  that deals hit point damage can benefit from this effect. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, chaos hammer or eldritch blast. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  CHASUBLE OF FELL POWER, GREATER  Cat’s-eye brooch  additional +4 bonus on saving throws against disease. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resistance, remove disease. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  CHARM OF COUNTERSONG  This small silver charm depicts lines of parallel musical notes. This small charm, usually pinned to the front of your shirt or tunic, allows you to use countersong to interrupt a sonic attack. Once per day, you can activate your countersong bardic music ability as an immediate action. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Perform 6 ranks, countersong. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day.  CHASUBLE OF FELL POWER Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Weight: — This long strip of scarlet cloth is embroidered with arcane sigils and mystic designs. While wearing a chasuble of fell power, your eldritch blasts (CAr 7) or spells you cast that have the chaotic descriptor deal an extra 1d6 points of damage. Only a chaotic spell  620_10762_Chp3.indd 85  CHRONOCHARM A chronocharm occupies the throat body slot, but it can be worn simultaneously with any number of other chronocharms, which all function normally. However, you can’t wear more than one of the same chronocharm. You must wear a chronocharm for 24 hours before you can access its abilities. If it is taken off, it becomes inactive until worn for an additional 24 hours.  A chronocharm of the celestial wanderer slows your perception of time, allowing you a second chance to recognize potential danger. When you activate this chronocharm, you can immediately reroll a single Listen or Spot check that you just attempted. The result of the second roll replaces the first result. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, hawkeye (SC 110 ). Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Chronocharm of the Fateweaver Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This tiny golden spindle dangles from a thin chain of gray steel.  Chronocharm of the fateweaver  Illus. by D. Martin & B. Trott  Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  As a chasuble of fell power, except the greater chasuble adds an extra 2d6 points of damage to your eldritch blasts or damaging spells you cast that have the chaotic descriptor. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, chaos hammer or eldritch blast. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 720 XP, 18 days.  This charm resembles an ebony starburst.  CLOTHING  Arcane runes seem to drift slowly across this scarlet strip of cloth.  Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation  Chronocharm of the Celestial Wanderer  Chronocharm of the horizon walker  Chronocharm of the celestial wanderer  Chronocharm of the grand master  Chronocharm of the uncaring archmage  Chronocharm of the laughing rogue  85  12/21/06 5:36:22 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  A chronocharm of the fateweaver slows your perception of time, letting you avoid an ill-advised step. When you activate this chronocharm, you can immediately reroll a single Balance, Climb, or Tumble check that you just attempted. The result of the second roll replaces the first result. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Chronocharm of the Grand Master Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This tiny, hollow glass flower dangles from a slim golden chain. A chronocharm of the grand master slows your perception of time, allowing you to better dodge an incoming ranged attack. When it is activated, you gain a +5 dodge bonus to your AC against a single ranged attack. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Chronocharm of the Horizon Walker Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This charm shows a rising sun half-obscured by the horizon. Like other chronocharms, this item slows your perception of time for a specific, singular purpose. When you activate a chronocharm of the horizon walker, you can move up to half your speed as part of the same swift action used to activate it; this movement does not provoke attacks of opportunity. When determining the distance you can move, round down to the nearest 5-foot increment. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, expeditious retreat. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Chronocharm of the Laughing Rogue Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This miniature hourglass hangs on a thin silver chain. As the sand runs from one bulb to the other, it turns from black to white. First imagined by skilled temple raiders devoted to Olidammara, the god of rogues, chronocharms of the laughing rogue have found their way into the toolboxes of thieves of all stripes. When you activate this chronocharm, you can immediately reroll a single Disable Device skill check that you just attempted. You can activate this item after the success or failure of the first roll has been determined (even if your failure resulted in accidentally setting off a trap), but before any ramifications of that roll have been applied. The result of second roll replaces the first result. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  Chronocharm of the Uncaring Archmage Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — A bloodstone eye stares forth from this pentagonal trinket. A chronocharm of the uncaring archmage alters your perception of time, allowing you to cast a single spell more quickly. When it is activated, the next spell of 3rd level or lower you cast that has a casting time of 1 full round can be cast as a standard action instead. If you don’t cast such a spell by the end of your turn, the effect fades. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Quicken Spell. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  CIRCLET OF MAGES Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — and free (command) Weight: — This leather circlet has a silver headpiece showing crescent moons on either side of a seven-pointed star. A circlet of mages grants you a +2 competence bonus on Concentration checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this circlet has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges when you cast a spell allows you to avoid losing that prepared spell or spell slot (as if you hadn’t cast it). 1 charge: Retain a spell of up to 1st level. 2 charges: Retain a spell of up to 2nd level. 3 charges: Retain a spell of up to 3rd level. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Rary’s mnemonic enhancer. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  CIRCLET OF RAPID CASTING Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This golden circlet is engraved with dozens of different symbols and runes. A circlet of rapid casting allows you to cast a small number of spells each day more quickly. This circlet has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges allows you to cast a single spell as part of the same swift action you used to activate the circlet. This spell must be one that normally has a casting time of no longer than 1 standard action. Doing this expends the prepared spell or spell slot as if you had cast the spell normally. 1 charge: Cast a single spell of up to 2nd level. 2 charges: Cast a single spell of up to 3rd level. 3 charges: Cast a single spell of up to 4th level.  86  620_10762_Chp3.indd 86  12/21/06 5:36:26 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Quicken Spell. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  CIRCLET OF SOLACE  A circlet of solace allows you to bolster your healing spells. After activating the circlet, the next healing spell you cast on a living ally before the end of your turn also grants that creature a +5 morale bonus on saves against disease, fear, and poison for 1 minute. If the spell affects multiple creatures, only one (your choice) gains the circlet’s benefit. A circlet of solace functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, delay poison, remove fear. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  CIRCLET OF WILD SURGING Price (Item Level): 4,200 gp (9th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 1 lb. This thin, platinum circlet depicts blasts of wild energy across its surface. A circlet of wild surging allows you to enhance your emotional state to make your wild surges more powerful. When you use wild surge while manifesting a power, you can activate the circlet to increase the bonus to your manifester level by 1. The increased wild surge still requires the normal extra power point cost normally required to augment the power. This also increases your chance of psychic enervation by 5% and increases the duration of your surging euphoria by 1 round (if you have that class feature). A circlet of wild surging functions three times per day, but won’t function in consecutive rounds.  Price (Item Level): 22,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 14th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. Thousands of thin, silvery chain links make up this long cloak. A cloak of battle grants you a +4 armor bonus to AC. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. The cloak also has two other abilities tied to unique command words. The first command transforms the cloak into an iron +1/+1 quarterstaff that leaps into your hands (or falls at your feet if you don’t have an open hand). The same command transforms the staff back into a cloak, returning it to your shoulders. The second command allows the cloak to make a disarm attempt against an adjacent opponent (using your base attack bonus and size modifier, and with a +4 bonus on the roll). This attempt does not provoke attacks of opportunity. If the disarm attempt succeeds, the cloak can fling the weapon up to 10 feet in any direction. (The disarmed weapon can’t be thrown at a creature as an attack.) If the disarm attempt fails, you can’t be disarmed in return. This ability can be used three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace, mage armor, magic weapon. Cost to Create: 11,000 gp, 880 XP, 22 days.  CLOAK OF ELEMENTAL PROTECTION Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb. This white cloak is embroidered with runes representing the five energy types in metallic thread. When you activate a cloak of elemental protection, you gain resistance 10 against a single energy type of your choice (acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic). This  CLOTHING  The circlet is made of delicate ivory threads interwoven with silver bands covered in runes of healing.  CLOAK OF BATTLE  protection lasts until the start of your next turn. A cloak of elemental protection functions once per day. You must wear a cloak of elemental protection for 24 hours before you can access its abilities. If it is taken off, it becomes inactive until worn for an additional 24 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resist energy. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, wild surge. Cost to Create: 2,100 gp, 168 XP, 5 days.  CLOAK OF PREDATORY VIGOR Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. This leopardskin cloak appears comfortable, yet protective. A cloak of predatory vigor helps you channel the power of your combat frenzy into rejuvenating energy. While in a rage or frenzy, you can activate this cloak to heal damage to yourself equal to your Hit Dice. This effect functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure moderate wounds. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  CLOAK OF QUILLS Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 1 lb. Thousands of small quills cover the exterior of this thick, high-collared leather cloak. While most of the quills are little more than the length of a porcupine’s, several on the shoulders and back are nearly 2 feet long. While grappling, each time you roll a grapple check (other than the initial check to enter or resist the grapple), you can activate your cloak of quills. Doing this lodges quills in your opponent, dealing 1d6 points of damage to each other creature in the grapple (Reflex DC 16 negates). This ability functions five times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, quillfire (SC 164). Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  87  620_10762_Chp3.indd 87  12/21/06 5:36:27 AM  CLOAK OF THE SALAMANDER  CLOAK OF SOULBOUND RESISTANCE, GREATER  Price (Item Level): 6,000 (10th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Made of cloth the color of a twilight sky, four bright blue quartz crystals form the clasp of this finely crafted cloak.  Illus. by S. Tappin  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  This red-hued cloak is made from the scales of a reptilian creature and feels warm to the touch. When donned, it erupts in flame, which dances continuously over its surface.  As a cloak of soulbound resistance, except a greater cloak of soulbound resistance has a maximum essentia capacity of 4, and the maximum resistance bonus it can grant is +5. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resistance. Cost to Create: 6,500 gp, 520 XP, 13 days.  A cloak of the salamander deals fire damage to those who strike you in melee with natural weapons or nonreach manufactured weapons. The flames that cover it do not harm you or creatures or objects that you touch. When you activate a cloak of the salamander, any creatures that strike you with such weapons take 1d6+7 points of fire damage. This effect lasts until the beginning of your next turn. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fire shield. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  CLOAK OF STONE Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 2 lb. Cloak of the salamander  CLOAK OF THE SALAMANDER, GREATER Price (Item Level): 36,000 gp (17th) Activation: — Made from the scaly hide of some reptilian beast, this crimson cloak is continuously shrouded in an aura of flame and smoke. As a cloak of the salamander, except the effect is continuous and requires no activation. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fire shield. Cost to Create: 18,000 gp, 1,440 XP, 36 days.  CLOAK OF SOULBOUND RESISTANCE Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  88  Price (Item Level): 13,000 gp (13th) Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) abjuration  This finely crafted garment is made of blue and purple material. A pair of matched blue quartz crystals form the cloak’s clasp.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 88  A cloak of soulbound resistance grants you a +1 resistance bonus on your saving throws. In addition, it serves as a receptacle for your essentia, much as a soulmeld does. Every point of essentia invested in it increases the bonus by 1, subject to the maximum values noted below. Each cloak of soulbound resistance has an essentia capacity. The maximum number of essentia points that can be invested in it equals this value or your normal essentia capacity (see Table 2–1: Essentia Capacity, Magic of Incarnum 19), whichever is lower. Investing or reallocating essentia in the cloak is a swift action (and can be done as part of the normal swift action used for reallocating essentia). A cloak of soulbound resistance has a maximum essentia capacity of 2, and the maximum resistance bonus it can grant is +3. Chakra Bind (Shoulders): A cloak of soulbound resistance improves your resistance bonus by an additional 1 when it is bound to your shoulders chakra, which can exceed the maximum values described above. See Binding Items to Chakras (MoI 108) for more information. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resistance. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  This mottled gray cloak looks like an incredibly thin sheet of stone. While wearing a cloak of stone, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can activate the cloak to merge with stone as though using the meld into stone spell. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, meld into stone. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  CLOAK OF THORNS Price (Item Level): 26,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This brown cloak seems to be composed entirely of long thorns. A cloak of thorns grants you a +2 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.)  12/21/06 5:36:29 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  In addition, any creature striking you in melee with a natural weapon or nonreach manufactured weapon takes 1d4+3 points of piercing damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, barkskin, command plants. Cost to Create: 13,000 gp, 1,040 XP, 26 days.  CLOAK OF TURN RESISTANCE Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Cloak of predatory vigor  CLOAK OF WEAPONRY Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. This simple white linen cloak is lined with a dark pelt that seems to shimmer and blur under close scrutiny. A cloak of weaponry has an extradimensional space within it that can hold a single  This cloak is little more than a tattered piece of homespun cloth, secured by a rotted leather thong at the neck. While you wear this cloak, your turn resistance increases by 4. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, rebuke undead as a 10th-level cleric. Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days.  Cloak of stone  weapon with a weight of up to 25 pounds and a size no larger than Medium. When you activate the cloak, you can draw forth the weapon (or stow a weapon, if the cloak is empty). Creatures and nonweapon objects can’t be stored within the cloak. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Leomund’s secret chest. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  Illus. by W. England & C. Critchlow  Cloak of quills  COLLAR OF HEALING Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: — This lightweight animal collar is crafted from fine leather.  Collar of healing  This collar allows you to heal your trusted animal friend at a moment’s notice. A collar of healing functions only when worn by your animal companion, familiar, or special mount. While that creature wears the collar, you always know its exact hit point total. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation.  89  620_10762_Chp3.indd 89  12/21/06 5:36:34 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  In addition, you can activate the collar from any distance (as long as you are on the same plane) to cure the animal wearing it. This instantly heals the creature wearing the collar of 50 points of damage and removes the fatigued or exhausted condition (if the creature currently suffers from such). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, heal or fortify familiar (SC 98) or heal mount, status. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  CONTACT MEDALLION Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: — This wide, ovoid medallion hangs from a tightly wrapped leather cord. It bears an engraving of two heads facing one another with a jagged beam of energy connecting their foreheads. When you activate a contact medallion, you forge a telepathic bond (as Rary’s telepathic bond) with one person who is within 1 mile and known to you. This bond lasts for 1 minute. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Rary’s telepathic bond. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  CORSAIR’S EYEPATCH Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  1 minute. Moving the eyepatch from one eye to another requires a move action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. A corsair’s eyepatch functions a total of three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, see invisibility. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  COUNTERSTRIKE BRACERS Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — Each of these steel bracers bears the image of a stacked pair of daggers pointed in opposite directions. Counterstrike bracers allow you to answer an unsuccessful melee attack against you with an unexpected riposte. You can activate the bracers immediately after an enemy has missed you with a melee attack. Doing this grants you a free attack of opportunity against that enemy (even if you have already used up your allotted attacks of opportunity for the round). You must activate the bracers before your enemy takes any other attacks or actions. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  CREST OF BRAVERY Price (Item Level): 750 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: —  A leather strap and a bit of hardened leather and krenshar hide make up this menacing black eyepatch.  This cloak clasp bears the engraved image of a paladin standing against a dragon.  Despite its name, the improved visual acuity provided by a corsair’s eyepatch is equally useful to landlubbers. Wearing this eyepatch has no negative impact on your eyesight—it appears completely transparent to you. While you wear a corsair’s eyepatch over your left eye, activating it grants you the ability to use see invisibility (as the spell) for 1 round. While you wear it over your right eye, activating it grants you the benefit of the Blind-Fight feat for  A crest of bravery adds a regal touch to your attire, emphasizing your bravery and loyalty to your comrades. A crest has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges enhances your ability to bolster your allies against fear, as described below. The effect lasts for 5 rounds. 1 charge: The morale bonus granted by your aura of courage increases by 4. 2 charges: Your aura of courage affects all allies within 60 feet of you.  3 charges: The morale bonus granted by your aura of courage increases by 4, and your aura of courage affects all allies within 60 feet of you. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, remove fear. Cost to Create: 375 gp, 30 XP, 1 day.  CRIMSON DRAGONHIDE BRACERS Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration, transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These leather bracers are crafted from the scaly red hide of a large reptile. Crimson dragonhide bracers grant you resistance to fire 5 and a +1 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, barkskin, resist energy. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  CRYSTAL MASK OF DETECTION Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb. This crystal mask is held in place with black cloth straps, and it covers only the top portion of the face. Translucent and shot through with golden flecks, the mask is warm to the touch. A crystal mask of detection grants you a +10 competence bonus on Search checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Search 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  CRYSTAL MASK OF DISCERNMENT Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb.  90  620_10762_Chp3.indd 90  12/21/06 5:36:39 AM  Crystal mask of dread  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Crystal mask of detection  Crystal mask of insight  A crystal mask of discernment grants you a +10 insight bonus on Sense Motive checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sense Motive 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  CRYSTAL MASK OF DREAD Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb. This black crystal mask is mapped with writhing red veins. It hides the entire face, revealing only the eyes. Black leather straps hold it tightly in place. A crystal mask of dread grants you a +10 competence bonus on Intimidate checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Intimidate 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  CRYSTAL MASK OF INSIGHT Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb. A simple, thin band of turquoise crystal, this item masks only the eyes. Thin, bone-white twine holds it in place. A crystal mask of insightful detection grants you a +9 insight bonus on Search and Spot checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Search 9 ranks, Spot 9 ranks. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  CRYSTAL MASK OF KNOWLEDGE Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb. This mask features a piece of curved golden crystal that covers the forehead. The crystal is attached to the front of a dark brown cloth cap.  A crystal mask of knowledge grants you a +5 competence bonus on a specific type of Knowledge check. For instance, one mask would add the bonus on Knowledge (psionics) checks, while another would do so for Knowledge (history). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Knowledge 5 ranks of the appropriate type. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  Illus. by A. Stokes  This transparent crystal mask has a pale green tinge and covers all the face, except the mouth and jaw. Its straps are made of silvery cloth.  CRYSTAL MASK OF LANGUAGES Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb. This cobalt mask covers only the lower portion of the face. Light brown leather straps hold it in place. Each of the various crystal masks of languages grants you the ability to speak, read, and write five different languages. For example, a mask might grant the ability to speak, read, and write Celestial, Draconic, Dwarven, Elven, and Infernal. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, speak, read, and write all five languages. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  91  620_10762_Chp3.indd 91  12/21/06 5:36:41 AM  CRYSTAL MASK OF MINDARMOR Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  The front portion of this periwinkle crystal mask drops down below the eyes. Narrow slits in the mask allow the wearer full range of vision. A crystal mask of mindarmor grants you a +4 insight bonus on Will saving throws. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, remove fear or conceal thoughts (EPH 85). Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Illus. by J. Thomas & S. Ellis  CRYSTAL MASK OF PSIONIC CRAFT Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb.  This bright blue opaque eye covering extends up to the hairline, down below the nose, and back to the ears. Though easy to pull off if desired, the mask fits snugly and needs no straps to keep it in place. A crystal mask of psionic craft grants you a +10 competence bonus on Psicraft checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Psicraft 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Crystal mask of visual insight  CRYSTAL MASK OF VISUAL INSIGHT Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) divination Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1/2 lb.  When activated, a crystal mask of visual insight allows you to ignore the effects of concealment (but not invisibility) on any creature within 30 feet for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true strike or moment of insight (CP 93). Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  This transparent band extends around the head at eye level.  Greatreach bracers  Deathguardian bracers  Deathstrike bracers  Bracers of the blast barrier Goodberry bracelet  92  620_10762_Chp3.indd 92  12/21/06 5:36:46 AM  DEATHGUARDIAN BRACERS  Boots of temporal acceleration  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 3 lb.  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. Each of these black steel bracers is marked with an etching of crossed swords. When activated, deathstrike bracers allow you to use melee weapons to deal extra damage from critical hits and sneak attacks to constructs, elementals, oozes, plants, and undead as if they were not immune to such extra damage. You must still roll a critical threat and confirm it as a critical hit or qualify to deliver sneak attack damage to gain any benefit from the bracers. This effect does not allow you to overcome any other immunity or resistance to extra damage from sneak attacks or critical hits (such as the fortification armor property). This effect lasts for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, keen edge. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  CLOTHING  DEATHSTRIKE BRACERS  Dimension stride boots Q uicksilver boots  DESPERATION CHAIN Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) no school Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 5 lb. Alternating links of a strange green metal and ivory make up this chainlike belt. A desperation chain gives an arcane spellcaster the opportunity to either avoid capture or strike back against an enemy. You can activate a desperation chain when you are being rendered helpless by an enemy (such as being pinned, paralyzed, or dropped to –1 or fewer hit points). When you activate the chain, you can cast a single arcane spell of 3rd level or lower without spending an additional action to do so. Doing this expends the prepared spell or spell slot as if you had cast the spell. The chosen spell must have a casting time no longer than 1 full round. Casting a spell in this way requires no verbal or somatic components and does not provoke attacks of opportunity. You must still provide any material components or focus required, as well as pay any XP or other costs of the spell. The spell you cast takes effect after the effect that rendered you helpless (so it can’t prevent that effect), though it could theoretically neutralize or reverse it. For example, a bard wearing the chain could cast cure light wounds in response to being reduced to –3 hit points.  This ability functions once per day. You must wear a desperation chain for 24 hours before you can access its abilities. If it is taken off, it becomes inactive until worn for an additional 24 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, limited wish. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Illus. by B. Hagan  Deathguardian bracers allow you to trade arcane spells for protection from physical harm. When you activate the bracers, choose a prepared arcane spell or uncast spell slot. You lose that spell or spell slot (as if you had cast the spell) and gain damage reduction equal to twice the level of the spell or spell slot sacrificed. This damage reduction lasts until the start of your next turn and can’t be overcome by any type of weapon. Deathguardian bracers can be activated as long as you have arcane spells remaining to sacrifice. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  CHAPTER 3  These two gold coils wind around the arm from bicep to wrist like serpents. A tiny ruby is set into each end of the coils.  DEVASTATION GAUNTLETS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — Stylized flames rendered in scarlet enamel encircle these steel gauntlets. Devastation gauntlets are prized by anyone who earns gold by fighting in melee, from raging barbarians to wily swashbucklers. These gauntlets have 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you a bonus to the damage dealt by a critical hit you make in melee. You activate the gauntlets after you have confirmed a critical hit, but before damage is rolled. 1 charge: +2d6 points of damage. 2 charges: +3d6 points of damage. 3 charges: +4d6 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, keen edge. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  93  620_10762_Chp3.indd 93  12/21/06 5:36:52 AM  Dragon spirit amulet  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Wyrmfang amulet  Dragon’s eye amulet  Illus. by W. England  Necklace of copper dragon scales  Dragon mask  DIMENSION STRIDE BOOTS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. These sleek leather boots lean slightly forward, as if poised to leap.  94  While wearing dimension stride boots, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Jump checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, the boots have 5 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges allows you to teleport a short distance (with no chance of error). You must have line of sight and line of effect to your destination. You can’t use the boots to move into a space occupied by another creature, nor can you teleport into a solid object; if you attempt to do so, the boots’ activation is wasted. You can bring along objects weighing up to your maximum load, but you can’t bring other creatures. 1 charge: Teleport 20 feet. 3 charges: Teleport 40 feet. 5 charges: Teleport 60 feet.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 94  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 day.  DISPELLING CORD  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dispel magic. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  DRAGON MASK  Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 2 lb.  The end of this long silken cord is tied with five different knots.  Glistening metals and brilliant paints adorn this elaborate mask, which has the shape of a stylized dragon head. Spreading like a sunburst around the draconic features are rays of shimmering metal and glass, one for each breed of metallic and chromatic dragon.  A dispelling cord is worn wrapped loosely around your chest, its two ends slung over your shoulder. When you activate a dispelling cord, you gain a +2 competence bonus on any dispel checks you make until the end of your turn. A dispelling cord functions five times per day. Each time it is activated, one of the five knots magically unties itself, indicating the uses remaining for the day. Lore: The first dispelling cords were created by an ancient king who wanted to prevent his enemies from having magical dominion over his army. To ensure magical supremacy, the king ordered his mages into battle armed with dispelling cords (Knowledge [history] DC 15).  When activated, a dragon mask allows you to use see invisibility, as the spell, for 5 minutes. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, see invisibility. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  12/21/06 5:36:56 AM  DRAGON SPIRIT AMULET  DRAGON’S-EYE AMULET  This necklace features a large, clear crystal set in silver, and the silhouette of a dragon has been etched onto it.  This amulet is a fist-sized orb painted to resemble a dragon’s eye. It hangs from a heavy gold chain.  Prized by dragon shamans (PH2 11), a dragon spirit amulet expands the range of the draconic aura channeled by those characters. When you activate this amulet, your draconic aura affects you and all allies within 60 feet to whom you have line of effect. This effect lasts for 1 round. Though originally designed for dragon shamans, this amulet functions equally well for any other character who gains a draconic aura (see Dragon Magic page 86). This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dragon type or dragonblood subtype. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  While wearing this amulet, you gain a +10 competence bonus on Search and Spot checks, and blindsense out to 30 feet. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dragonsight (SC 73). Cost to Create: 27,500 gp, 2,200 XP, 55 days.  DRAGONSCALE CLOAK [RELIC]  This long, flowing cloak is sewn from an assortment of chromatic dragon scales.  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Weight: —  Dragonscale cloak Activation: — and free (mental); see text Weight: 1 lb.  This wide, embroidered belt sash is emblazoned with images of fire-breathing dragons.  These thick leather gauntlets sport real dragon’s teeth for studs.  While you wear a dragon spirit cincture, your breath weapon damage is increased by one die (or by 1 point if your breath weapon doesn’t deal damage expressed in dice). If you are also holding a magic weapon that deals the same type of damage as your breath weapon, your breath weapon save DC increases by 1. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, breath weapon. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Dragonfang gauntlets function as masterwork spiked gauntlets and also grant you a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength. In addition, three times per day, you can activate the gauntlets to treat your next melee attack against a weapon or shield as though you had the Improved Sunder feat, even if you don’t meet its prerequisites. If you have Improved Unarmed Strike, dragonfang gauntlets allow you to overcome damage reduction with your unarmed strikes as though you were wielding a magic weapon. In this case, you deal unarmed strike damage instead of spiked gauntlet damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength, magic weapon, shatter. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 610 gp for masterwork spiked gauntlets), 320 XP, 8 days.  Price (Item Level): 8,610 gp (12th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation, transmutation  620_10762_Chp3.indd 95  Illus. by W. England  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 2 lb.  DRAGON SPIRIT CINCTURE  DRAGONFANG GAUNTLETS  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 55,000 gp (18th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  While wearing this cloak, you have resistance 5 to an energy type of your choice (acid, cold, electricity, or fire) provided that you are chaotic evil, neutral evil, or chaotic neutral. You can select or change the resistance by speaking the command word. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can also transform a dragonscale cloak into functional dragon wings upon command. The wings (which last for 2 hours per day, divided up as you wish) allow you to fly with a speed of 60 feet and average maneuverability. Additionally, the value of the cloak’s resistance to energy increases to 20. To use the relic power, you must worship Tiamat and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD. Lore: The first dragonscale cloak is said to have been created from the scales of Tiamat herself by a devoted high priest who visited the dragon queen on her home plane. Since then, those who ally with evil dragons have occasionally collected assortments of scales with which  95  12/21/06 5:37:01 AM  to duplicate the process (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, polymorph, resist energy. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  DREAMING BLINDFOLD  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 7,500 gp (11th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) illusion Activation: 1 minute (command) Weight: —  Illus. by E. Widermann  This black silk blindfold is embroidered with mystical symbols done in silver thread. While wearing a dreaming blindfold, you are effectively blinded, but you can send a useful or terrible dream to a sleeping creature. Once per day, the blindfold can produce either one of two effects (but not both in the same day): Dream: You send a phantasmal message to a specific known living creature. This effect functions as the dream spell, except that the range is 100 miles and you can’t deliver the dream through a messenger. Nightmare: You send a hideous phantasmal vision to a specific known living creature. This effect functions as the nightmare spell, except that the range is 100 miles. If you are also wearing a psicrown (EPH 169), you can target the recipient of the dream or nightmare with a single psionic power generated by the psicrown as if you were adjacent to that creature. However, the power costs twice the normal number of power points and renders the dreaming blindfold inert for seven days.  Empowered spellshard  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dream, nightmare. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp, 300 XP, 8 days.  EAGLE CLAW TALISMAN Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — An eagle claw worked from adamantine dangles from a silver chain. The wearer of an eagle claw talisman is capable of delivering ruinous strikes against doors, locked chests, or other objects. When you activate an eagle claw talisman, you gain a +5 competence bonus on the next Strength check (or unarmed strike damage roll) you make to break or burst an item. This effect lasts for 1 round or until used. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shatter. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  EMPOWERED SPELLSHARD Price (Item Level): See text Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) varies Activation: See text Weight: 1/4 lb.  This reddish crystal shard is inscribed with arcane symbols, banded with mithral, and hanging from a small silver chain. An empowered spellshard is keyed to a specific spell of up to 3rd level. When you cast the attuned spell, you can use your empowered spellshard as a focus in addition to the spell’s normal components (if any). Doing this empowers the spell (as though using the Empower Spell feat, but with no adjustment to spell level or casting time). The spellshard is activated as a part of the spellcasting process. The markings on the shard reveal the spell to which it is attuned to a character who makes a successful DC 30 Spellcraft check. The prices and levels of empowered spellshards are described on the table below. Spell Level 1st 2nd 3rd  Price (Item Level) 1,500 gp (5th) 3,000 gp (7th) 6,000 gp (10th)  An empowered spellshard functions three times per day. The school of magic an empowered spellshard radiates is the same as that of the spell to which it is attuned. Lore: These shards were created during the last great war to assist battle mages on the front lines (Knowledge [history] DC 10). As a result, many empowered spellshards are keyed to destructive evocation spells (Knowledge [history] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Empower Spell, spell to which the shard is attuned.  Enemy spirit pouch Brooch of stability  Eagle claw talisman  Anklet of translocation  96  620_10762_Chp3.indd 96  12/21/06 5:37:06 AM  ENDURING AMULET  This circular, coin-shaped talisman is half flame red and half ice blue.  ENEMY SPIRIT POUCH Price (Item Level): 2,100 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. A small collection of teeth, small scales, knots of hair, and strange bits of jerky fills this pouch. The worn leather bag’s strings are long enough to allow the pouch to be worn as a necklace. This item is keyed to a single type of creature (aberration, animal, magical beast, and so on). A pouch keyed to humanoids or outsiders must be keyed to a subtype as described in the ranger’s favored enemy ability (PH 47). While wearing an enemy spirit pouch, you gain a +1 competence bonus on attack rolls against creatures of this type. If you are a ranger, the pouch increases your favored enemy bonus against creatures of its type by 2. If you don’t have the favored enemy ability, the pouch grants you a +2 bonus on damage rolls and certain skill checks as if that type of creature were your favored enemy.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 97  EXECUTIONER’S HOOD [RELIC] Executioner’s hood  If a creature of the type keyed to the pouch wears that pouch, it receives one negative level. The negative level remains for as long as the pouch is worn and disappears when it is no longer carried. The negative level never results in actual level loss, but cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the pouch is worn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, detect animals or plants, ranger with favored enemy type/subtype matching that of the pouch. Cost to Create: 1,050 gp, 84 XP, 3 days.  ESSENTIA HELM Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. A flawless sapphire is set on this heavy steel helm, shining almost too faintly to notice. These imposing helmets are valued by incarnates and other meldshapers, because they can temporarily supercharge one or more of your soulmelds or other essentia receptacles (see Magic of Incarnum for details on incarnum). An essentia helm has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges maximizes the essentia investment in one or more of your soulmelds or other essentia receptacles (as  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This black cloth hood is made of coarse fabric. Two eyeholes have been crudely cut to allow its wearer to see, and it is secured at the neck with a piece of rope tied in the style of a noose. Death and destruction have accompanied the former wearers of an executioner’s hood. Those who know of this item’s dark history are terrified to look upon one. While wearing an executioner’s hood, you can attempt a coup de grace attack as a standard action rather than a full-round action if you are chaotic evil, neutral evil, or chaotic neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, each time you make a successful coup de grace attempt, you gain a +1 morale bonus on melee attack rolls and damage rolls and 1 temporary hit point per level. These benefits last for 5 minutes and stack to a maximum of a +5 bonus and 5 temporary hit points per level. To use the relic power, you must worship Erythnul and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Legend holds that a high priest of Erythnul created the original three executioner’s hoods and distributed them to followers in large cities, who wore them to terrify the local citizens (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). One executioner’s hood was worn by a ruler named Xeric IV, who publicly  Illus. by C. Critchlow  An enduring amulet protects you from extremes of temperature, as if by the endure elements spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, the amulet has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you resistance to cold and fire for 1 round. 1 charge: Resistance to cold 10 and fire 10. 2 charges: Resistance to cold 15 and fire 15. 3 charges: Resistance to cold 20 and fire 20. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resist energy. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  chosen by you when you activate it) for 1 round. Effectively, the helm temporarily adds essentia to the affected receptacles (soulmelds, incarnum feats, magic items, and so on) until it reaches its maximum. While this ability is in effect, you can’t reallocate essentia from the affected receptacle. 1 charge: Maximizes essentia investment in one receptacle. 2 charges: Maximizes essentia investment in two receptacles. 3 charges: Maximizes essentia investment in three receptacles. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, essentia pool, meldshaper. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days (1st level); 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (2nd level); 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days (3rd level).  97  12/21/06 5:37:10 AM  Fanged mask  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Corsair’s eye patch  Lore gem  Illus. by A. Stokes  Headband of conscious effort  executed every member of his own extended family two centuries ago. Since then, the three hoods have been scattered across the globe by tides of war and conquest (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, bear’s endurance. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  EYES OF EXPANDED VISION Price (Item Level): 3,200 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: — These two ovals of murky glass are rimmed with brass and linked by a brass arch. When resting on the bridge of a wearer’s nose, the glass magically clears.  98  These lenses expand your field of vision. Flanking opponents gain only a +1 bonus when attacking you instead of +2 (attack benefits that are conditional on flanking, such as a rogue’s sneak attack damage, still apply because you remain flanked). You gain a +2 competence bonus on Spot checks but take a –2 penalty on saves  620_10762_Chp3.indd 98  against gaze attacks. These are continuous effects and require no activation. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true seeing or ubiquitous vision (EPH 139). Cost to Create: 1,600 gp, 128 XP, 4 days.  EYES OF POWER LEECH Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — Bluish energy plays about these silver-tinted lenses. Silver wires extend back to wrap around the ears. Once per day, you can drain power points from another psionic creature by meeting its gaze. A selected target within 40 feet must succeed on a DC 16 Will save, or a connection of crackling energy is formed between the wearer and the victim. The connection drains 1d6 power points from the target for every round that the wearer concentrates (to a maximum of 7 rounds). Concentrating to drain power points is a full-round action. Each round, you gain 1 power point from those drained from the target (subject to your normal maxi-  mum). Points you cannot gain are lost immediately. Eyes of power leech have no effect on nonpsionic targets or psionic creatures with a current power point reserve of 0. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, vampiric touch or power leech (EPH 124). Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  EYES OF POWER LEECH, VAMPIRIC Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) enchantment Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — Gold wire rims these dark lenses and extends back to wrap around the ears. Blue sparks of energy dance about them. As eyes of power leech, except that you gain power points from the subject even if doing so would bring you over your normal maximum. Furthermore, you can maintain concentration for up to 13 rounds. Power points you gain in excess of your maximum fade after 8 hours if they are not spent before that time.  12/21/06 5:37:15 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, vampiric touch and limited wish or power leech (EPH 124) and bend reality (EPH 80). Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  EYES OF TRUTH  FANGED MASK Price (Item Level): 8,300 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. Two rows of overlapping, mismatched teeth form a curving ridge along the bottom of this bronze half-mask’s spiny demonic visage. Snakes’ fangs, sharks’ teeth, filed human incisors, and other yellowed specimens create half of a monstrous maw.  This chain bears a large green crystal in its center. Four smaller, removable charms of red crystal also hang from the pendant. To use a farspeaking amulet, one character wears the central crystal, while up to four others carry the four removable, red crystals. Removable crystals don’t occupy a body slot, and can simply be carried. Charms can be removed or replaced as a standard action. The wearer can, with a standard (mental) action, return a single charm to the amulet from any distance, as long as it is on the same plane. When you activate the amulet, you create a link between yourself and any or all of the characters carrying red charms, enabling all affected characters to converse as if standing together. This effect lasts for up to 10 minutes, and the amulet can be activated three times per day. Only characters on the same plane as the amulet’s wearer can participate in the conversation. If you also wear a magic item that grants you a competence bonus on Listen checks when you activate the amulet, you can choose to also listen to the environment of any or all of the characters in the conversation as if you were present. The magic of the amulet allows you to differentiate between the various locations without undue confusion.  When you activate a fanged mask, you can make a natural bite attack. The bite deals 1d6 points of damage plus your Strength modifier (assuming you are Medium; see DMG 28 for details on damage for larger and smaller creatures). This attack is treated as a magic weapon for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction, and the bite damage doesn’t stack with any bite attack you already have. Three times per day, upon biting a target while activating the mask, you can force that creature to make a successful DC 13 Fortitude save or be stunned for 1 round.  FIENDHELM Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: — and full-round (command) Weight: 2 lb. This horned, black adamantine helm seems to absorb the light around it. The helm’s faceplate shows a fiendish visage, and hellish orange light leaks from its eyes, nostrils, and mouth. A fiendhelm allows an evil-aligned wearer to emulate certain traits of evil extraplanar creatures. Your melee attacks are treated as evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, a fiendhelm allows you to use dispel good, inflict critical wounds, and resist energy (electricity or fire only) as spell-like abilities each once per day. Use your own character level as the caster level, and the save DCs equal 10 + the spell level + your Cha modifier. A fiendhelm grants no benefit to nonevil wearers. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dispel good, inflict critical wounds, resist energy, evil alignment. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Illus. by E. Cox  Eyes of truth grant you improved visual acuity, and can allow you briefly to see the world as it truly is. While worn, the lenses grant you a +5 competence bonus on Spot checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can activate the lenses to gain a true seeing effect (as the spell) for 1 round. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true seeing. Cost to Create: 2,750 gp, 220 XP, 6 days.  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  CLOTHING  This pair of thin, crystal lenses has a faint blue tint.  FARSPEAKING AMULET  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairaudience/clairvoyance, message. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 5,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) divination Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: —  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, magic fang or magic weapon. Cost to Create: 4,150 gp, 332 XP, 9 days.  FIERY TUNIC Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 2 lb. This eye-catching tunic shifts and moves like liquid flame. A crystal shard burns a brilliant red in the middle of the chest, fused seamlessly with the cloth of the shirt. A fiery tunic grants you resistance to fire 5. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate the tunic, it generates a fire shield, as the spell (warm shield effect only), that lasts for 5 rounds. In addition, any melee weapons you hold while the fire shield is active are treated as flaming weapons (DMG 224). You can deactivate this effect at any time with  99 Fiery tunic  620_10762_Chp3.indd 99  12/21/06 5:37:20 AM  another swift action. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Wondrous Item, planar binding. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  FINNED GAUNTLETS  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. Sweeping fins adorn these sharkskin gauntlets.  Illus. by A. Stokes  You gain a natural swim speed of 30 feet (which also grants you a +8 bonus on Swim checks to perform some special action or avoid a hazard). You can always take 10 on a Swim check, even if distracted or endangered, and can use the run action while swimming. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, swim (SC 217). Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  FIREFLOWER PENDANT Price (Item Level): 13,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 13th  Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — or immediate (command) Weight: — This fragile pendant is constructed from rose gold and shaped into the form of a flower. It is set with many tiny fire opals. A fireflower pendant provides you with resistance—or even brief immunity—to fiery attacks. While it is worn, you gain resistance to fire 10. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate the pendant, you gain immunity to fire until the start of your next turn. However, doing this renders the pendant powerless for 1 hour thereafter. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, energy immunity, resist energy. Cost to Create: 6,500 gp, 520 XP, 13 days.  FLESH RING OF SCORN Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  To gain the benefit of a flesh ring of scorn, you must wear it as a piercing through the flesh of your upper chest. You can activate it whenever you score a critical threat on a creature. The critical threat is automatically confirmed, but the flesh ring of scorn deals damage to you based on your weapon’s critical multiplier. Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  Damage 2d6 3d6 4d6  A flesh ring of scorn functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, corrupt weapon (DMG 182). Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  FORMLESS VEST Price (Item Level): 3,200 gp (8th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This simple tunic seems misshapen, but it actually fits perfectly well.  Barbs protrude from this tiny iron ring.  Farspeaking amulet  Fireﬂower pendant  Heartseeking amulet  Crest of bravery Githborn talisman Hand of the Oak Father  Flesh ring of scorn  100  620_10762_Chp3.indd 100  12/21/06 5:37:23 AM  Price (Item Level): 8,302 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: Standard Weight: 1 lb.  GAUNTLETS OF THE BLAZING ARC Price (Item Level): 6,300 gp (10th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb.  Flakes of dried gore encrust this crude iron gauntlet. Upon its back is stained the image of a single bloodshot eye.  Gauntlets of extended range  GAUNTLET OF INFINITE BLADES Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration, divination Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This gauntlet is made of braided mithral links. A gauntlet of infinite blades allows you to produce a weapon at a moment’s notice. When it is activated, a dagger appears in the hand wearing the gauntlet. This ability functions as often as needed, though the dagger disappears 3 rounds after it is created. In addition, the gauntlet has 5 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges creates a more potent dagger than normal, as described below.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 101  1 charge: +3 dagger. 3 charges: +3 dagger of seeking. 5 charges: +3 bane dagger of seeking (choose the creature type and subtype, if needed, when activating the gauntlet). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Wondrous Item, greater magic weapon, major creation, summon monster I, true seeing. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 7 days.  GAUNTLETS OF ARROW REFLECTION Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb. These leather gauntlets have small polished steel disks set in their palms.  These finely crafted metal gauntlets are etched with flames. Each is set with small red crystals that rest on the tops of the knuckles. When activated, gauntlets of the blazing arc create a 15-foot cone-shaped burst of flame that deals 4d4+4 points of fire damage to all creatures in the area (Reflex DC 14 half). This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, burning hands. Cost to Create: 3,150 gp, 252 XP, 7 days.  Illus. by D. Martin  Three times per day, this +1 gauntlet allows you to make a melee touch attack to blind a target creature for 1 hour (Fort DC 14 negates). Elves take a –4 penalty on this save. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Wondrous Item, blindness/ deafness, orc. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork gauntlet), 320 XP, 8 days.  CLOTHING  GAUNTLET OF GRUUMSH  Gauntlets of arrow reflection allow you to redirect a deflected thrown or projectile weapon back at your attacker. When you use the Deflect Arrows feat (PH 93) to deflect a ranged weapon attack, you can activate the gauntlets to cause the weapon to fly back at the character who made the attack. Use the attacker’s original attack roll to determine the attack’s success, and roll damage as normal as if your attacker had successfully hit with the weapon. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, protection from arrows. Gauntlets of the Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days. blazing arc  Gauntlets of mindﬁre  CHAPTER 3  A formless vest allows you to briefly make your body amorphous, allowing you to avoid particularly deadly strikes. Once per day, you can activate this vest to take half of the damage dealt to you by a critical hit or sneak attack. You can activate the vest after damage has been determined, but before it has actually been dealt. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, gaseous form. Cost to Create: 1,600 gp, 128 XP, 4 days.  GAUNTLETS OF THE BLOOD-LORD [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,120 gp (10th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These heavy spiked gauntlets are made from overlapping metal plates. Blood drips slowly from the junctures, coating the surface of the gauntlets with a thick, red ooze. Said to harbor the blood of a thousand victims, each pair of these gauntlets has a long and grisly history. They function as +1 spiked gauntlets if you are lawful evil, lawful neutral, or neutral evil. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, gauntlets  101  12/21/06 5:37:28 AM  Illus. by J. Zhang & W. Reynolds  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  of the blood-lord grant you a +2 luck bonus on melee touch attacks while you wear them. To use the relic power, you must worship Hextor and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. If you sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 Hit Dice, every 3rd-level or lower melee touch spell that you cast is automatically empowered as by the Empower Spell feat (although such a spell doesn’t use a higher-level spell slot and the casting time of the spell isn’t increased). Lore: The first pair of these gauntlets was worn by a priest of Hextor who mercilessly slew entire villages to make way for the Blood-Lord’s approaching army (Knowledge [religion] DC 15). Upon the priest’s death, Hextor reclaimed the gauntlets. Since then, he has given a pair to a favored follower at least once every century (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Maximize Spell, Sanctify Relic, inflict serious wounds. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp (plus 620 gp for pair of masterwork spiked gauntlets), 180 XP, 5 days.  GAUNTLETS OF ELDRITCH ENERGY Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation  damage (the type of energy depends on the type of gauntlets) instead of its normal damage type. You can’t apply the gauntlets’ effect to any blast already affected by an eldritch essence invocation. Four varieties of these gauntlets exist. Each applies a different type of energy damage to your eldritch blast: gauntlets of eldritch frost (cold), gauntlets of eldritch lightning (electricity), gauntlets of eldritch fire (fire), and gauntlets of eldritch thunder (sonic). This ability can be used three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, eldritch blast. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  GAUNTLETS OF ENERGY TRANSFORMATION  Gauntlets of the blood-lord  Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. These black leather gauntlets are studded with multicolored gems. Gauntlets of eldritch energy let you imbue your eldritch blasts (CAr 7) with a particular type of energy. When you activate these gauntlets, the next eldritch blast you use before the end of your turn deals energy  Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This pair of leather gloves is imprinted with arcane sigils representing different types of energy. Gauntlets of energy transformation allow you to temporarily change the type of energy produced by any weapon you hold. When you activate the gauntlets, you change one type of energy damage produced by a melee weapon you hold into another type  Gauntlets of eldritch energy  Gauntlets of energy transformation  Gauntlets of arrow reﬂection  Gauntlets of giantfelling  Gauntlets of inﬁnite blades  Gauntlets of throwing  Gauntlets of weaponry arcane  102  620_10762_Chp3.indd 102  12/21/06 5:37:32 AM  Each of these well-made gauntlets is set with small purple crystals that rest across the tops of the knuckles. Whenever you throw a weapon or other object, gauntlets of extended range give the weapon a telekinetic push, doubling its range increment. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, hawkeye (SC 110) or extend range (CP 89). Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, reduce person. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  GAUNTLETS OF LASSITUDE Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These tan leather gloves are bound in brass. Three times per day, you can make a melee touch attack with these gauntlets. If your attack is successful, the target is subjected to the effect of a slow spell for 5 rounds (Will DC 14 negates). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, slow. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  GAUNTLETS OF MINDFIRE Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb.  GAUNTLETS OF GIANTFELLING Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — These leather gloves are cracked and worn, but still quite durable. When you activate gauntlets of giantfelling, you gain a bonus on the next weapon damage roll you make against a creature Gauntlets of the talon  620_10762_Chp3.indd 103  Extra Damage 1d6 2d6 3d6  Once per day, gauntlets of mindfire can be activated to project a 15-foot cone-shaped burst of mental sickness. A successful DC 14 Fortitude save negates the effect. Any creature that fails its saving throw contracts a virulent form of mindfire. A victim can be infected only once; subsequent uses of this item on an infected target produce no further effect. Mindfire has no incubation period—a victim immediately takes 1d4 points of Intelligence damage. Each day thereafter, a victim must succeed on a DC 14 Fortitude save or take another 1d4 points of Intelligence damage. If a victim succeeds on its Fortitude save two days in a row, it fights off the disease and takes no more damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mind poison (SC 141) or mindfire (CP 93). Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days. Illus. by J. Zhang  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1/2 lb.  Size Categories Larger 1 2 3 or more  These gauntlets appear pitted and decayed, although closer inspection reveals them to be sound. Each is set with small amber crystals that rest on the tops of the knuckles.  CLOTHING  GAUNTLETS OF EXTENDED RANGE  larger than you before the end of your turn. The extra damage is based on how many size categories larger than you the target is.  CHAPTER 3  of energy damage (acid, cold, electricity, or fire) for 1 round. Transformed energy does the same amount of damage, but a +1 flaming longsword could be changed to deal acid, cold, or electricity damage instead of fire. If a weapon produces more than one type of energy, each activation affects only one type of energy produced. For example, if you wield a +1 flaming shock longsword, you could activate the gauntlets to change the fire damage to acid, cold, or electricity damage, and you could activate the gauntlets a second time to change the electricity damage dealt by the shock property to acid, cold, or fire. If your weapon doesn’t deal energy damage, these gauntlets have no effect. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, acid splash, burning hands, ray of frost, shocking grasp. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  GAUNTLETS OF THE TALON [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These elegant gauntlets are made of a silvery metal and have a scaly surface. Each finger is tipped with a long talon made of sapphire. Provided that you are lawful good, lawful neutral, or neutral good, gauntlets of the talon grant you two primary natural claw attacks that count as magic weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Each claw deals 1d6 points of slashing damage (if you are Medium). Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection and already have levels in the monk class, you are treated as if you were a monk of five levels higher than you actually are for the purposes of AC, unarmed damage, and the ki strike ability. This benefit doesn’t stack with similar benefits (such as from a monk’s belt). Also, you can treat your unarmed damage as either bludgeoning or slashing damage (chosen each time you attack). To use the relic power, you must worship Bahamut and either sacrifice a 3rd-level divine spell slot or have the  103  12/21/06 5:37:37 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  True Believer feat and at least 5 HD. If you sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD, the gauntlets also function as ghost touch weapons for the purpose of attacking incorporeal creatures. In addition, you gain a +4 bonus on grapple checks. Lore: It is said that this silvery set of gauntlets was fashioned by Bahamut himself, then given to the master of a now-defunct order of monks (Knowledge [religion] DC 15). Members of the order’s inner circle eventually discovered the secret of their manufacture, but they managed to make only a few additional sets before their order was destroyed by followers of Tiamat (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, righteous might. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by E. Widermann & W. England  GAUNTLETS OF THROWING Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This pair of flexible but tough maroon leather gauntlets has a complex sigil on each palm. Gauntlets of throwing turn any handheld weapon into a deadly thrown weapon. When you activate gauntlets of throwing, you grant any one melee weapon you hold the throwing and returning properties (DMG 225–226) for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, magic stone, telekinesis. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  overcomes damage reduction as if it were a magic silvered weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, magic weapon. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  GEM OF THE GLITTERDEPTH [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This black, thousand-faceted gem seems to sparkle with an inner fire regardless of the ambient light. To gnomes, these gems are the very embodiment of the earth’s blessings. When you wear a gem of the glitterdepth, you gain a +2 enhancement bonus to Wisdom if you are neutral good, lawful good, chaotic good, or neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you also have blindsense out to 30 feet while wearing the gem. In addition, you know instinctively where the walls, ceiling, and floor are in any cavern you’re in, no matter how large or what the illumination. To use the relic power, you must worship Garl Glittergold and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD.  Gem of the glitterdepth  Lore: According to legend, Moradin wrested the five original gems of the glitterdepth from the earth and gave them to Garl Glittergold, who cut and polished them and then hid them for his dedicated clergy to find (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, owl’s wisdom. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  GHOST SHROUD Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: — Weight: — This shroud looks like a ghostly, translucent version of a winding cloth used to wrap a body for burial. While wearing a ghost shroud, you gain a +1 deflection bonus to Armor Class. In addition, all your melee attacks can affect incorporeal creatures as if you were wielding a ghost touch weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create undead, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  GAUNTLETS OF WEAPONRY ARCANE  GHOUL GAUNTLETS  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  These long, leather gauntlets extend far up the forearm. Silver stitching covers much of the leather, forming complex arcane runes.  These mottled leather gauntlets appear worn and threadbare.  Any weapon (even a nonmetallic one) you hold while wearing these gauntlets  Ghoul gauntlets have no effect when worn by a construct or undead creature. If you are a living creature, however, these gaunt-  104  620_10762_Chp3.indd 104  Ghost shroud  12/21/06 5:37:40 AM  Price (Item Level): 1,800 gp (5th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — A swirl of carved arabesques marks the top of this otherwise austere gray stone pendant. Both githyanki knights who captain astral longships and githzerai monks who hunt in rrakmas are known to wear these stones, which are designed for use against their most hated enemies. When you activate a githborn talisman, you gain a +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and weapon damage rolls against aberrations, as well as a +2 insight bonus on Will saves made against the extraordinary, supernatural, and spell-like abilities of aberrations. This benefit lasts for 1 round. If you are a githyanki or githzerai, these bonuses improve to +4. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, owl’s wisdom, true strike. Cost to Create: 900 gp, 72 XP, 2 days.  GLOVES OF AGILE STRIKING Price (Item Level): 2,200 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — These forest-green silk gloves feel like a second skin.  GLOVES OF THE BALANCED HAND Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — Small, open hands formed of hardened leather rest upturned on the backs of each of these thin, brown gloves. While wearing these gloves, you fight as though you possess the Two-Weapon Fighting feat. If you already have TwoWeapon Fighting, you can make an additional attack with your off hand as if using the Improved Two-Weapon Fighting feat. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, righteous might or Tenser’s transformation. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  GLOVES OF ELDRITCH ADMIXTURE Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — Dark whorls stream across these leather gloves, dizzying the eye and clouding the mind. Warlocks (CAr 5) prize these gloves, which allow them to enhance their eldritch blasts with pure energy. Gloves of eldritch admixture have 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges adds extra damage to the next eldritch blast you make before the end of your turn. This damage can be acid, cold,  or fire, as chosen by you each time you activate the gloves. 1 charge: +2d6 points of damage. 2 charges: +3d6 points of damage. 3 charges: +4d6 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Melf’s acid arrow or vitriolic blast invocation (CAr 136), scorching ray or brimstone blast invocation (CAr 132), ray of ice (SC 167) or hellrime blast invocation (CAr 134). Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  GLOVES OF FLAME Price (Item Level): 7,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb.  CLOTHING  GITHBORN TALISMAN  Gloves of agile striking grant you brief bursts of impressive dexterity in combat. When you activate these gloves, you deal an extra 1d6 points of damage with ranged weapons and light weapons (as well as nonlight weapons that can be used with Weapon Finesse, such as a rapier). If you are delivering a skirmish attack (see the scout class, CAd 10), this bonus improves to 2d6. This effect lasts for 1 round. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, divine agility (SC 69). Cost to Create: 1,100 gp, 84 XP, 3 days.  CHAPTER 3  lets virtually meld with your flesh when you put them on, making your hands appear gaunt and rotting. Once per round while wearing these gauntlets, you can make a melee touch attack that paralyzes the target for 1d6+2 rounds (Fort DC 13 negates). Elves are immune to this paralysis. You can also deliver this attack as part of an unarmed strike, slam, claw, or similar natural attack made with the hand, but in that case, you must attack normally, not with a touch attack. If you die while wearing ghoul gauntlets, they revert to their normal appearance. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ghoul touch. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  These leather gloves have steel plates sewn onto the backs of each hand and finger. Small black crystal shards are mounted on the back of each hand, glowing an eerie orange that highlights the swirling mark within. A faint smell of sulfur surrounds the gloves. Gloves of flame provide you with the protection of an endure elements spell against cold temperatures and resistance to cold 5. These are continuous effects and require no activation. In addition, five times per day you can utter the word “burn” in Ignan to generate flame in the palm of one hand. This flame is as bright as a torch and persists for up to 10 minutes or until you utter either of two other command words, each of which creates a particular effect and then extinguishes the flame. “Scorch”: Creates a 15-foot cone-shaped burst of fire that deals 5d4 points of fire damage (Reflex DC 11 half). “Singe”: Make a melee touch attack that deals 1d6+5 points of fire damage. Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Wondrous Item, planar binding. Cost to Create: 3,500 gp, 280 XP, 7 days.  GLOVES OF FORTUNATE STRIKING Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — These supple white leather gloves are embroidered with blue symbols of luck.  105  620_10762_Chp3.indd 105  12/21/06 5:37:45 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  You can activate gloves of fortunate striking to reroll an attack roll that you’ve made before you know whether the attack succeeded. You must use the second result, even if it’s lower. You can’t use this ability if you have already rerolled the attack for any reason. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true strike. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 40 XP, 2 days.  GLOVES OF INCARNUM THEFT Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by B. Hagan  These fine leather gloves are dyed midnight blue. A single ruby is set into the back of each. While wearing gloves of incarnum theft, if you make a successful unarmed melee touch attack (as part of the activation) against a target with essentia, you gain 1 point of essentia and the target loses 1 point from its essentia pool (Will DC 15 negates). If the target has no essentia pool, the attack has no effect.  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: —  Three times per day, you can make a ranged touch attack (range 30 feet) that deals 1d8+5 points of electricity damage. You gain a +3 bonus on the attack if the target is wearing metal armor (or is made out of metal, is carrying a lot of metal, and so on). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shocking grasp. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  GLOVES OF MANUAL PROWESS Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — This pair of fine, charcoal-gray leather gloves is exceptionally comfortable. They are so well made that they do not impair the sense of touch. Gloves of manual prowess allow you to temporarily excel at tasks involving fine manual dexterity. These gloves have 3  Gloves of the uldra savant  Gloves of ﬂame  620_10762_Chp3.indd 106  GLOVES OF LIGHTNING  Strips of hardened blue leather run to the knuckles of this fingerless glove in a jagged lighting-bolt pattern.  Gloves of the titan’s grip  Gloves of lightning  106  The stolen essentia can immediately be invested in any soulmeld, incarnum feat, or other essentia receptacle of yours with no action required, even if essentia investment wouldn’t normally be allowed at this time. If you have no means of using essentia, you gain no benefit, but the target still loses the point. The stolen essentia remains in your essentia pool for 12 minutes, then returns to the original possessor. Chakra Bind (Hands): If you bind gloves of incarnum theft to your hands chakra, you instead steal 2 points of essentia with a successful touch attack, and the save DC to resist its effect increases by 2. See Binding Items to Chakras (MoI 108) for more information. Lore: The first gloves of incarnum theft were created by an arcane trickster named Hexandros who dabbled in incarnum use (Knowledge [the planes) DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, rend essentia (MoI 104). Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  Gloves of fortunate striking  12/21/06 5:37:47 AM  Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: — The palms and fingertips of these white lace gloves are threaded with platinum. While wearing these gloves and handling an inanimate object, you can learn details about that object’s previous owner through the psychic impressions it has accumulated. The amount of information revealed depends on how long you study the object. 1st minute: Last owner’s race. 2nd minute: Last owner’s gender. 3rd minute: Last owner’s age. 4th minute: Last owner’s alignment. 5th minute: How last owner gained and lost the object. 6th+ minute: Next-to-last owner’s race, and so on. Gloves of object reading will not identify casual users as owners. (Anyone who uses an object to attack someone or something is not thereafter considered a casual user.) An object without any previous owners, or without any owners in the past ten years, reveals no information. If you employ these gloves additional times on the same object, the information yielded is the same as the first time. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, scrying or object reading (EPH 123). Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — Weight: — Black striations run across the fingers of these red leather gloves. If you hit a creature with a melee attack while it is casting a spell, add 5 to the DC of the Concentration check required to avoid losing the spell. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, dispel magic. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  GLOVES OF THE TITAN’S GRIP Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. Banded with aged wood, rough metal, and chunks of stone, these oversized gloves rumble when flexed. While wearing these gloves, you gain a +8 enhancement bonus on grapple checks. These gloves automatically activate when you enter a grapple, and the effect lasts for 7 rounds. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength or grip of iron (EPH 111). Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days.  GLOVES OF THE ULDRA SAVANT Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 2 lb. Made from a pale blue metal and adorned with glowing, faint blue runes, these gloves are caked with layers of frost and ice. While wearing these gloves, you can create a ray of frost at will.  In addition, three times per day, you can imbue any melee weapon held in your hand with the frost property (DMG 224) for 5 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ray of frost. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  GOGGLES OF DAY Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  CLOTHING  GLOVES OF OBJECT READING  GLOVES OF SPELL DISRUPTION  CHAPTER 3  charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you a competence bonus on the next Disable Device, Forgery, Open Lock, Sleight of Hand, or Use Rope check you make. You must begin the check within 1 round of activating the gloves. You can’t apply this bonus when you take 10 or take 20—it only applies on a check you actually roll. 1 charge: +5 competence bonus. 2 charges: +7 competence bonus. 3 charges: +10 competence bonus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  The lenses of these goggles are made of silvered crystal, and the frames are hewn from smoky quartz. When you place these goggles over your eyes, you can operate without penalty in preternaturally bright light, such as might result from a flare, sunbeam, or sunburst spell. These goggles also allow a vampire wearer to take a full-round action prior to dissolution when confronted with sunlight, as opposed to just a move or standard action. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, darkvision. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  GOGGLES OF DRACONIC VISION Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. These goggles have unusually large, yellowtinted lenses, with a dark stripe resembling a vertical pupil in the center of each. Goggles of draconic vision grant you a +5 bonus on Spot checks, low-light vision, and darkvision out to 60 feet. In addition, while wearing them, you cannot be blinded by the cloud a hovering dragon creates (though the cloud still provides concealment for all within it). These are continuous effects and require no activation. Once per day, you can activate the goggles to grant you blindsense out to 30 feet for 1 minute. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dragonsight (SC 73). Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  107  620_10762_Chp3.indd 107  12/21/06 5:37:52 AM  GOGGLES OF THE EBON HUNTER  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  Goggles of draconic vision Goggles of day  Goggles of foeﬁnding  CLOTHING  These goggles consist of coin-sized lenses set in a wire frame with a thin wire band apparently meant to secure them to the wearer’s head. Goggles of the ebon hunter grant you darkvision out to 30 feet, as well as a +1 competence bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls with ranged weapons. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, darkvision, true strike. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 720 XP, 18 days.  Illus. by S. Ellis  GOGGLES OF FOEFINDING Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — Weight: — The lenses of these goggles continually fade back and forth between soot black and snow white. When you attack foes that have cover while you wear goggles of foefinding, you can ignore the cover bonus to AC they would normally receive. The goggles do not, however, allow you to circumvent the effect of total cover. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairvoyance/clairaudience. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  GOGGLES OF LIFESIGHT Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) divination Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. The lenses of these goggles are hewn from smoky quartz. A tiny hourglass decorates the upper corner of each side of the frame.  108  620_10762_Chp3.indd 108  Goggles of the ebon hunter  When you activate these goggles, you automatically know whether any visible creature within 30 feet is alive, dead, undead, or neither alive nor dead (such as a construct). This power can be blocked by any effect that would prevent the effect of a detect undead spell. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, deathwatch. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  GOODBERRY BRACELET Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — Hanging from this simple silver bracelet are a number of charms that look like berries. A goodberry bracelet provides basic nourishment and minor healing to its wearer and her allies. Each day at dawn, as long as it is worn, this bracelet creates five silver, berry-shaped charms. When plucked from the bracelet, a charm becomes an edible berry with magical properties equivalent to those created by a goodberry spell, except that no character can benefit from more than one berry per day. Regardless of whether the charm is eaten, removed but uneaten, or still on the bracelet, all charms and berries created by the bracelet disappear 24 hours after they are created. If you also wear a magic item that grants a bonus to your Wisdom score, you can add half the bonus granted by that item to the healing provided by each berry. For example, a character wearing this  Goggles of lifesight  bracelet and a periapt of Wisdom +4 would create berries that heal 3 points of damage (instead of just 1 point). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, goodberry. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  GREATER PIWAFWI Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration, illusion Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. Formed of fine gray cloth smoother and lighter than silk, this delicate cloak is covered in a fine layer of spider webs. A greater piwafwi grants you resistance to fire 5 and a +5 competence bonus on Hide checks. A lesser version of this item is equivalent to a cloak of elvenkind (DMG 253). Lore: The drow created piwafwis to conceal their scouts and warriors from the eyes of enemies. They claim that the cloaks of elvenkind crafted by their surface cousins are mere copies of these items (Knowledge [arcana] or Knowledge [dungeoneering] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, invisibility, resist energy, drow. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 7 days.  GREATREACH BRACERS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 5 lb.  12/21/06 5:37:53 AM  This pair of arm-length, leathery bracers is sewn from blackened sinews and tendons.  Price (Item Level): 21,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 3,400 gp (8th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. Layers of coarse brown horsehair make up this stiff, crudely woven shirt.  This belt of tightly woven, white human hair has several blue and orange crystals braided evenly through it.  GWAERON’S BOOTS Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These boots are formed of intricately knotted and interwoven green ropes. Small buds and leaves sprout from several of the larger fibers.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 109  This intricately detailed hand was carved from oak bark and dangles from a crude loop of twine. A hand of the oak father has six abilities, each of which functions once per day: barkskin, entangle, goodberry, plant growth, speak with plants, and tree shape. All abilities function as the spells of the same name. A hand of the oak father has hardness 10 and resistance to acid 10, cold 10, electricity 10, fire 10, and sonic 10. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, barkskin, entangle, goodberry, plant growth, speak with plants, tree shape. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days. Illus. by E. Cox  A Gwaeron’s belt has two abilities, each of which functions once per day. The first command causes your weapon to burst into flames (as the flaming weapon property; DMG 224) for 12 rounds. The second command produces a wind walk effect, as the spell, but affecting only you. Lore: The first of these belts was created for Gwaeron Windstrom, a legendary tracker and master of wilderness lore who served as an intercessor between mortals and various wilderness deities (Knowledge [nature] DC 15). Some claim that Gwaeron Windstorm has ascended to the status of demigod, and a few shrines even exist in his name (Knowledge [nature] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, flame blade, wind walk. Cost to Create: 10,500 gp, 840 XP, 21 days.  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination, transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  CLOTHING  GWAERON’S BELT  HAIR SHIRT OF SUFFERING  HAND OF THE OAK FATHER  CHAPTER 3  Sometimes called “choker sleeves” due to their appearance and effect, these pliable bracers allow you to attack from a surprising distance. When you activate greatreach bracers, your arms stretch and elongate, extending your reach by 10 feet for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, enlarge person. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  While wearing these boots, you are affected as if by a pass without trace spell. In addition, you produce no smell and cannot be detected by the scent extraordinary ability. Lore: See Gwaeron’s belt. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, pass without trace. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  HAT OF ANONYMITY Price (Item Level): 12,500 gp (13th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This plain black hat has a broad brim and a wide black silk band.  Hair shirt of suffering  A hair shirt of suffering provides a +1 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. You can also activate the shirt to use cure serious wounds on any creature other than yourself (healing 3d8+9 points of damage). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, barkskin, cure serious wounds. Cost to Create: 1,700 gp, 136 XP, 4 days.  This hat obscures you from detection, allowing you to blend into a crowd with ease. While you wear it, you are under a continuous nondetection effect and have a +5 bonus on Hide checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, nondetection. Cost to Create: 6,250 gp, 500 XP, 13 days.  HEADBAND OF CONSCIOUS EFFORT Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — The front of this delicate golden headband is set with an array of three matched tiger’s-eye gems that seem to glow with inner fire. While wearing a headband of conscious effort, you can attempt a Concentration check  109  12/21/06 5:37:57 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Bear helm  Blindhelm  Fiendhelm Angelhelm  Helm of heroes  Horned helm  Illus. by J. Zhang  Helm of gazes  instead of a required Fortitude saving throw once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Combat Casting, bear’s endurance. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  HEADBAND OF THE LOREBINDER Price (Item Level): 1,600 gp (5th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — The face of this blue-green metal circlet is stamped with the image of a blank, open scroll. A headband of the lorebinder grants a +4 sacred bonus on bardic knowledge checks (and on a loremaster’s lore checks). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Three times per day, you can activate the headband to gain the effect of a read magic spell. This ability lasts for 30 minutes. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, read magic, bard. Cost to Create: 800 gp, 64 XP, 2 days.  HEALING BELT Price (Item Level): 750 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Waist  Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. This broad leather belt is studded with three moonstones. While wearing a healing belt, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Heal checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, the belt has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges allows you to channel positive energy and heal damage with a touch. (You can also use this ability to harm undead, dealing them an equivalent amount of damage instead.) 1 charge: Heals 2d8 points of damage. 2 charges: Heals 3d8 points of damage. 3 charges: Heals 4d8 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure moderate wounds. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  HEARTSEEKING AMULET Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Light reflects from this tiny, dark, three-tined amulet like the full moon shining on a tranquil swamp. A heartseeking amulet allows your weapon to pierce armor and scaled hides as if they were air. When you activate this amulet, the next melee attack you make is made as a melee touch attack instead. If you don’t make a melee attack by the end of your turn, the effect is wasted. A heartseeking amulet functions three times per day. Lore: Many sunsets ago in the swamps of the lizardfolk, the Lizard King battled the Lava Children. Though he pierced them repeatedly with his trident, they were immune to the metal of his weapon; it passed through them as if they did not exist. Eventually, he drowned the Lava Children’s champions in brackish pools and drove their menace back into the magma bowels below the Geyser Fens (Knowledge [history] DC 15). Eventually, he was able to imbue his own trident not just with the ability to ignore metal but also to pass nearly all physical defenses. Today that secret has been replicated in the tiny amulets that resemble his mighty weapon (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true strike. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  110  620_10762_Chp3.indd 110  12/21/06 5:38:00 AM  HELLCAT GAUNTLETS Price (Item Level): 3,200 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 5th Aura: Moderate; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This elegant mithral helm is light, yet sturdy. A helm of battle is a useful tool if you favor tactical maneuvers over brute force. When you activate the helm, you gain a +2 bonus on the next attack roll or ability check you make to attempt a bull rush, disarm, overrun, sunder, or trip attempt during your turn. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fox’s cunning. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  This magnificent helmet is chased with gold and silver, and set with three yellow topazes. Developed by a militant, lawful good sect for its paladins, these helmets are potent healing devices. Once per day, this helmet can heal you of 4d8+7 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure critical wounds. Cost to Create: 2,800 gp, 224 XP, 6 days.  HELM OF HEROES Price (Item Level): 5,600 gp (10th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This iron helm bears horns of ivory, each etched with scenes from famous battles.  HELM OF GAZES Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. This mirror-bright steel cap is set with three tiger’s-eye gems, each one looking in a different direction.  HELM OF THE PURPLE PLUME [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 4 lb. This golden helm covers three-quarters of the face and sports a large, purple feather. Symbolic of honor and justice, the purple plume marks a warrior of particular valor and conspicuous honor. While wearing a helm of the purple plume, you have a +2 enhancement bonus to Charisma if you are lawful good, neutral good, or lawful neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you also gain a +5 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects while you wear the helm. Not only are you more resistant to fear, but exposure to fear actually emboldens you. Whenever you successfully save against a fear effect, you receive the benefit of a heroism spell for 10 rounds. If you have immunity to fear, you automatically gain this benefit whenever you are subjected to a fear effect from an enemy. To use the relic power, you must worship Heironeous and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. Lore: The original helms of the purple plume were given as trophies to the winners of jousting tournaments held by followers of Heironeous. Since then, they have passed from noble knight to brave squire throughout the centuries (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, heroism. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  Illus. by J. Zhang  HELM OF BATTLE  Price (Item Level): 5,600 gp (10th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 3 lb.  CLOTHING  When you activate hellcat gauntlets, the next spell you cast during your turn that targets a single creature also deals 1d6 points of slashing damage per level of the spell, unless the spell has no effect on the target (due to spell resistance or a save negating the spell, for example), in which case the extra damage is negated. This ability functions three times per day, but it can’t be activated in consecutive rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spectral hand, keen edge. Cost to Create: 1,600 gp, 128 XP, 4 days.  HELM OF GLORIOUS RECOVERY  A helm of heroes is prized by marshals (MH 11), because it allows them to better direct their allies in battle. When you wear this helm and use your grant move action ability, you can choose instead to grant each affected character a single melee attack (using each ally’s full base attack bonus). This ability’s activation is a part of the grant move action activation. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shout. Cost to Create: 2,800 gp, 224 XP, 6 days.  CHAPTER 3  The fingers of these gray and scarlet gauntlets end in sharp talons, and a faint odor of brimstone rises from them.  Each time you would be required to roll a save against a gaze attack, a helm of gazes automatically absorbs the gaze (with no action required). This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spell turning. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  Helm of the purple plume  111  620_10762_Chp3.indd 111  12/21/06 5:38:04 AM  HORNED HELM Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  CHAPTER 3  This dark leather helm has an open face, and a pair of deer antlers rises from the forehead.  CLOTHING  When you place a horned helm on your head, the antlers join solidly with your skull. These antlers grant you a natural secondary gore attack that deals 1d8 points of damage plus half your Strength bonus. The antlers are treated as a magic weapon for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste, magic fang. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, blade barrier, mage armor. Cost to Create: 17,000 gp, 1,360 XP, 34 days.  INCARNUM FOCUS Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: See table Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: See table This item is forged or carved of a blue material, and a tiny star sapphire has been set into it.  Incarnum focus  IMPERVIOUS VESTMENT Illus. by W. England  Price (Item Level): 34,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. Impervious vestment  HEXBANDS Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. These hexagonal, cold iron bands are sized to fit over the biceps and bear various arcane runes. Hexblades (CW 5) rely on these items to enhance their curse power and their combat prowess. While worn, hexbands increase the save DC of your hexblade’s curse by 1. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, when you activate your hexbands, you can add your Charisma bonus (if any) on weapon damage rolls you make against any creature currently affected by your hexblade’s curse. This benefit lasts for 1 round, and this ability functions five times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s splendor. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  112  620_10762_Chp3.indd 112  This black silk robe is embroidered with adamantine thread in an elegant waterfall pattern. An impervious vestment grants a +5 armor bonus to your Armor Class. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can command it once per day to create a blade barrier as a ringed wall of whirling blades only (20 feet high, up to 90 feet in diameter, centered on your current location). This effect lasts for 18 minutes or until dismissed as a standard action. As long as you wear the vestment, you can pass through your barrier without harm, though you receive no such protection against any other blade barrier.  Incarnum Focus Item Incarnum bracers Incarnum goggles Incarnum circlet Incarnum boots Incarnum gauntlets Incarnum vestments Incarnum cloak Incarnum robe Incarnum amulet Incarnum belt  Chakra Arms Brow Crown Feet Hands Heart Shoulders Soul Throat Waist  Body Slot Arms Face Head Feet Hands Torso Shoulders Body Throat Waist  Weight 1 lb. 1 lb. — 2 lb. 2 lb. 1 lb. 1 lb. 2 lb. — 1 lb.  12/21/06 5:38:07 AM  The harsh suns carved into these heavy steel bracers resemble grim versions of the normally forgiving visage of Pelor, god of the sun. Inquisitor bracers provide a potent method for sorting out normal townsfolk from conniving vampires or similarly stealthy undead. After you activate these bracers, the next melee attack you make before the end of your turn includes a cure moderate wounds effect (in addition to the normal damage dealt by the attack). Ideally, this effect damages its undead target and reveals its evil nature, but in cases of mistaken identity, at least the healing helps counteract the damage dealt to a living (and possibly innocent) target. You can’t use these bracers as part of a touch attack—only as part of a normal melee attack. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure moderate wounds. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  620_10762_Chp3.indd 113  These two leather straps seem worn and frayed at the edges. When wrapped around both hands, these straps grant a +2 enhancement bonus to the DC of your Stunning Fist attack (or any other effect gained by expending daily uses of that feat). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Stunning Fist, magic weapon. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  LENSES OF BRIGHT VISION Price (Item Level): 600 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — These thin, yellow quartz lenses are the size of two coins. Lenses of bright vision allow you to project light from your eyes. When placed over your eyes (a standard action), these lenses meld into your face, and the irises of your eyes take on a faint yellow hue. When you activate the lenses, they create a 15-foot cone of bright light emanating from your eyes. Unlike normal light sources, the lenses produce no shadowy illumination. The illumination lasts for 10 minutes or until you expend another swift action to douse it. Treat this  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  INQUISITOR BRACERS  KI STRAPS  Ki straps  effect as a 0-level spell for the purpose of interacting with darkness effects. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, light. Cost to Create: 300 gp, 24 XP, 1 day.  LENSES OF TRUE FORM Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — These lenses are small, clear, crystalline constructions set into a golden frame. When you place these lenses over your eyes, they become all but invisible (Spot DC 30 to notice). While wearing the lenses, you gain a +10 circumstance bonus on Spot checks to see through a disguise. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, once per day you can activate the lenses to force a single shapeshifted creature within 30 feet to resume its natural form. The target creature can attempt a DC 14 Will save to resist. Failure means it immediately assumes its natural form, shape, and size, and it cannot assume a different shape for the next 2d4 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true seeing, dispel magic or greater dispel magic. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel & J. Zhang  While worn, an incarnum focus adds 1 to the essentia capacity of any soulmeld occupying or bound to the chakra it matches (up to a maximum capacity equal to your Constitution bonus). See Magic of Incarnum for information on essentia, soulmelds, and chakras. Wearing an incarnum focus does not prevent you from binding a soulmeld to the corresponding chakra. This is a specific exception to the normal rule against binding a soulmeld to the same chakra as a worn magic item. Ten different kinds of incarnum focus exist, one for each chakra (see the table) Chakra Bind (Any): While an incarnum focus is bound to its chakra, any soulmeld occupying or bound to the same chakra can’t be unshaped except by you, nor can any essentia invested in it be lost or drained, except as part of the normal reallocation process. You can bind an incarnum focus to its matching chakra even if it is already occupied by a shaped or bound soulmeld. See Binding Items to Chakras (MoI 108) for more information. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Split Chakra (MoI 41), essentia pool. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  LIGHTNING GAUNTLETS  Inquisitor bracers  Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation  113  12/21/06 5:38:14 AM  Illus. by M. Poole & R. Spencer  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  This large ring is set with a faceted ruby. Closer inspection reveals a tiny trigger near the base of the stone.  Threads of copper run along the fingers of these finely crafted black leather gloves.  Hidden below the stone in this ring is a set of tiny prongs, wires, and other small devices that spring out when the trigger is depressed. Using a lockpicking ring grants you a +5 competence bonus on Open Lock checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can activate the ring once per day to use knock. You must touch the ring to the portal you want to open. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, knock. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  Each pair of lightning gauntlets has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges allows you to deal electricity damage to an adjacent target. No attack roll is required, but a successful DC 14 Reflex save halves the damage dealt. 1 charge: 2d6 points of electricity damage. 2 charges: 3d6 points of electricity damage. 3 charges: 4d6 points of electricity damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shocking grasp. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  LORE GEM Price (Item Level): 7,500 gp (11th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) divination Activation: — and full-round (mental) Weight: —  LIGHTNING TUNIC Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. A pattern of lightning bolts adorns this fine, blue linen tunic. A lightning tunic allows you to punish attackers with crackling electricity. This tunic has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges creates an electrical field around your body, which deals electricity damage to anyone striking you with a natural attack or nonreach melee weapon. This effect lasts for 3 rounds once activated, and it does not harm you or your gear. 1 charge: 2d6 points of electricity damage. 2 charges: 3d6 points of electricity damage. 3 charges: 4d6 points of electricity damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shocking grasp. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  114  620_10762_Chp3.indd 114  Lightning gauntlets  LOCKPICKING RING Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — and standard (manipulation) Weight: —  Lockpicking ring  This oval purple gem is flat on one side. Images of strange runes seem to materialize and dissipate within it. A lore gem affixes to your forehead and can be easily removed (requiring a standard action either way). While it is worn, you can better focus your mind and memory, gaining a +2 competence bonus on Knowledge checks, though you must spend a full round in contemplation to gain this bonus. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Additionally, a lore gem acts as a spellbook, allowing a wizard (or any other spellcaster who requires a spellbook) to record spells into and prepare spells directly from the lore gem. The gem holds up to thirty spells of any levels, and recording a new spell into a lore gem requires the normal amount of time and expense. You can also erase an existing spell as a standard action. A newly created lore gem is empty of spells, but a lore gem recovered as treasure might have spells recorded within, at the DM’s option. If so, the value of the item should increase as if it were a spellbook.  12/21/06 5:38:18 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, legend lore, secret page. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp, 300 XP, 8 days.  Rivulets of blood gush down the flensed face of this red metal mask.  MANTLE OF SECOND CHANCES  This mantle is made of brilliant blue cloth that is smooth to the touch, like silk. Symbols representing various elements of good fortune are embroidered along its hem in white and silver.  MASK OF LIES Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. Mantle of second chances  This black, featureless mask has cross-shaped slits where the wearer’s eyes and mouth should be. While wearing this mask, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Bluff checks and your alignment is disguised as if by an undetectable alignment spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate the mask, you can alter your appearance as if by a disguise self spell. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, disguise self, undetectable alignment. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  MASK OF MENTAL ARMOR  MASK OF BLOOD Price (Item Level): 3,300 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: — Weight: —  Mask of lies  620_10762_Chp3.indd 115  Illus. by W. England & R. Spencer  Once per day you can tap into the power of good fortune. When you do so, you can reroll one roll that you have just made before the DM declares whether it resulted in success or failure. You must accept the result of the reroll, even if it’s worse than the original roll. You can access the mantle’s power even if you already have a similar ability from a class feature (such as the granted power of the Luck domain). Lore: A human bard named Elva, who had a knack for getting herself into tight situations, designed the original mantle of second chances (Knowledge [history] DC 15). A mantle of second chances makes you lucky and allows you second chances when none should be possible (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Luck domain. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) divination Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  If you are wearing a mask of blood when you enter a rage or frenzy, that ability lasts for 1 round longer than normal. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. The liquid flowing over a mask of blood is normally harmless, but when you activate the mask, you can spit a stream of blood as a ranged touch attack (range 30 feet). This stream deals 4d6 points of acid damage to the target. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Melf’s acid arrow, rage. Cost to Create: 1,650 gp, 132 XP, 4 days.  115  12/21/06 5:38:24 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Moonstone mask  Illus. by A. Stokes  Broad lines radiate from the eyes of this blue leather mask, each ending in a spiral. You gain a +3 resistance bonus on saving throws against mind-affecting spells and abilities. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spell resistance. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  MASK OF SILENT TRICKERY Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — This pale gray mask is designed to cover the left half of your face. A moonstone is set into its cheek. A mask of silent trickery allows you to cast certain spells without others hearing you. When you activate this mask, you can omit the verbal component of the next enchantment or illusion spell you cast before the end of your turn (as if applying the Silent Spell feat to it, but without altering the spell’s level or casting time). This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Silent Spell, silence. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  116  620_10762_Chp3.indd 116  MASK OF SWEET AIR Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — Weight: — Cut to cover the mouth and nose, this clear crystal half-mask has tiny, bubblelike imperfections that mar the interior surface of. While wearing a mask of sweet air, you can breathe freely in air fouled by smoke, dust, and fumes without fear of suffocation. You gain a +5 bonus on saves against airborne stench attacks and inhaled poisons, such as the stench of a troglodyte or the effect of cloudkill. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of breath (Snd 116), neutralize poison. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  MEDAL OF GALLANTRY Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: — This silver brooch is shaped like the sun. A golden cabochon adorns the center. A medal of gallantry grants you a +2 bonus on Diplomacy checks but imposes a –2  Mask of mental armor  penalty on Bluff checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Three times per day, you can activate the medal to use sanctuary on yourself. If you attack while protected by this effect, you take a –1 morale penalty on that attack and all subsequent attacks for 1 hour afterward. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, sanctuary. Cost to Create: 675 gp, 54 XP, 2 days.  MESMERIST’S GLOVES Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) enchantment Activation: Free (mental) Weight: 1 lb. These dark leather gloves have patterns of swirling, multicolored lines embroidered onto the palms. Mesmerist’s gloves allow a spellcaster to affect an extra target with her enchantment spells. Any time you cast an enchantment spell of 3rd level or lower that targets an enemy, you can activate this item to have the spell also target another enemy within 10 feet of the original target. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mass suggestion. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  12/21/06 5:38:29 AM  MIND BLADE GAUNTLET  MIND BLADE GAUNTLET, LESSER  A shimmering opalescent gleam shifts slowly across this leather gauntlet.  A lesser mind blade gauntlet functions as a mind blade gauntlet, except that it holds a weapon property with a +1 bonus market price modifier that can be used by a soulknife with the mind blade enhancement class feature. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, mind blade. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  MINDVAULT Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — This circlet bears a tiny gem, which appears to have a hollow cage deep within its facets. A mindvault offers its wearer temporary shelter from effects that would influence his mind. When you activate a mindvault, your consciousness is transferred into the gem held in the circlet for 1 round. While this effect lasts, you are immune to mind-  MIND BLADE GAUNTLET, GREATER Price (Item Level): 42,000 gp (17th) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) conjuration This softly glowing gauntlet seems made from seamless cloth spun from opals.  Price (Item Level): 3,700 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: — and standard (thrown); see text Weight: 1 lb. A number of tiny silvery bells adorn this glistening bracelet, each sculpted with swirling and curving embellishments. As long as at least one of the eleven bells that adorn this bracelet remain, it provides a +2 competence bonus on Perform checks. The bells are easily detached, allowing you to remove and throw one up to 40 feet. When it reaches the end of its trajectory, the bell explodes in a sound burst, as the spell. Once activated, a bell is expended and cannot be used again. When the last bell is removed, the bracelet loses all magic. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, sound burst, bard. Cost to Create: 1,850 gp, 148 XP, 4 days.  MONOCLE OF PERUSAL  A greater mind blade gauntlet functions as a mind blade gauntlet, except that it holds a weapon property with a +3 bonus market price modifier that can be used by a soulknife with the mind blade enhancement class feature. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, mind blade. Cost to Create: 21,000 gp, 1,680 XP, 42 days.  Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: —  Medal of gallantry  620_10762_Chp3.indd 117  MITHRAL BELLS  Illus. by R. Spencer  A mind blade gauntlet allows a soulknife to enhance the power of his mind blade. Each mind blade gauntlet is created with a particular weapon property with a market price modifier of +2 (such as collision) that can be used by a soulknife with the mind blade enhancement class feature (see the soulknife class description, EPH 26). When you expend your psionic focus while manifesting your mind blade, the blade gains the weapon property designated by the gauntlet. This effect lasts for 1 minute. If you split your mind blade into two matching blades, the effect applies only to the mind blade manifested through the mind blade gauntlet. Unlike most items that occupy the hands body slot, you can wear two mind blade gauntlets simultaneously, allowing an effect to be applied to each mind blade (but not two effects to one mind blade). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, mind blade. Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  This soft leather gauntlet has an opalescent shine.  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 24,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Free (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  affecting spells and abilities. However, you are dazed in that round as well. You can activate a mindvault after you learn the result of an incoming mindaffecting spell, but before the effect is applied. For example, after failing your Will save and learning that an enemy wizard has affected you with dominate person, you could activate your mindvault before the domination takes effect (thus negating it entirely). A mindvault functions once per day. You must wear a mindvault for 24 hours before you can access its abilities. If it is taken off, it becomes inactive until worn for an additional 24 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, magic jar. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  117  12/21/06 5:38:34 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  This lens is made of smoothly polished crystal and set inside an ebony band. It is attached to a black leather cord tied into a loop to secure it to the wearer’s clothing when not in use. This lens provides you with a +5 competence bonus on Appraise checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Furthermore, it allows you to use identify three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, identify. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 7 days.  MOONSTONE MASK Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination, transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. Highlights of moonstone accentuate every ridge and curve of this angular silver mask. A moonstone mask grants you a +5 competence bonus on Listen and Spot checks, as well as darkvision out to 30 feet. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairaudience/clairvoyance, darkvision. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  NECKLACE OF COPPER DRAGON SCALES Price (Item Level): 570 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. Six coin-sized copper dragon scales adorn this simple brown cord. Upon touching one of the six scales that make up this necklace and uttering a command word, you gain resistance to acid 5 for 1 hour. Once all six scales are used, the necklace becomes dull and loses its magic. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resist energy. Cost to Create: 285 gp, 22 XP, 1 day.  NECKLACE OF WARNING  118  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd  620_10762_Chp3.indd 118  Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This short necklace is composed of white jade and tiny sapphires. A necklace of warning warns you of impending danger, granting you a +2 bonus to your flat-footed AC (up to a maximum value equal to your normal AC). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, augury. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  PEARL OF SPEECH Price (Item Level): 600 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — This large blue pearl is shot through with crisscrossing brown, green, and gold veins. These items were originally created by drow and used to command their slaves without stooping to learn their foul languages. The secret of creating pearls of speech long ago became known to bards and others who rely on languages. When you place a pearl of speech upon your tongue (a standard action), it is absorbed into your mouth until you speak the proper command word to release it. While absorbed, the pearl grants you the ability to speak and understand a specific language, such as Dwarven or Draconic. Each pearl is created for a specific language, and you can have only one pearl of speech active at a time. In addition, while the pearl is active, it can be activated to produce a command effect once per day (Will DC 11 negates). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, command, tongues. Cost to Create: 300 gp, 24 XP, 1 day.  PENDANT OF JOY Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Moderate; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: — Weight: — This teardrop-shaped amulet is made of bluegreen crystal. When it is worn by a character who has at least 1 power point, a pendant of joy subtly reaches out to nearby minds, touching  them with feelings of pleasure and contentment. All creatures within 30 feet (including the wearer) gain a +2 morale bonus on Diplomacy checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, calm emotions. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  PHOENIX HELM Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: See text Weight: 3 lb. This helm is forged of copper and inlaid with silver and gold. The whole piece is stylized in the shape of a phoenix with its wings unfurled, its legs guarding the temples, and its head adorning the brow. A phoenix helm grants you low-light vision. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, you can use each of the following abilities once per day: feather fall, resist energy, and speak with animals (birds only). Each of these abilities can be used as a standard (command) action except feather fall, which requires an immediate (command) action to activate. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, feather fall, low-light vision (SC 134), resist energy, speak with animals. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 7 days.  PIERCER CLOAK Price (Item Level): 900 gp (4th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — The back of this dark cloak depicts a silver spear pointed downward. The wearer of a piercer cloak can make devastating attacks when positioned above her enemy. When you activate a piercer cloak, any attack you make on your current turn from higher ground (PH 151) deals an extra 1d6 points of damage. If you charge your enemy from at least 10 feet above him, this extra damage increases to 2d6. This benefit lasts for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Lore: When the Halfling Rain came to Holtberg—the seven nights when halfling thieves pounced from rooftops onto passersby, assassinating them or  12/21/06 5:38:38 AM  Platinum helm  [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. This scaled metal helm covers the entire face. A pair of large, fully spread dragon wings is attached at the temples.  Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) varies Activation: — Weight: — This heavy bronze amulet features a pair of wings that cover the upper chest. At the pendant’s center rests a glimmering, multifaceted crystal. Each discipline of psionics has its own psionatrix. Wearing one adds a +1 enhancement bonus to the save DC of powers of the appropriate discipline. For example, the DC to resist psionic suggestion is 1 higher when the caster wears a psionatrix of telepathy. The glow in the heart of the central crystal varies depending on its school: light blue (clairsentience), green (metacreativity), red (psychokinesis), violet (psychometabolism), orange (psychoportation), and yellow (telepathy). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, specialized in the appropriate discipline. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  QUICKSILVER BOOTS Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) illusion Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  RAGS OF RESTRAINT Price (Item Level): 3,200 gp (8th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Illus. by W. England  A platinum helm imbues you with the essence of Bahamut, lord of the good dragons. While wearing it, you are immune to the frightful presence of evil dragons if you are lawful good, neutral good, or lawful neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can activate the helm as you make an attack to create a frightful presence effect. When you do so, each foe within 60 feet of you must succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 your Hit Dice + your Cha modifier) or be panicked (if it has 4 or fewer HD) or shaken (if it has 5 or more HD) for 4d6 rounds. This ability functions three times per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Bahamut and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. If you sacrifice an 8th-level spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 15 Hit Dice, you can command the helm once per day to grant you blindsense with a 60-foot range for 1 hour. Lore: The seven original platinum helms were given to the gold dragons that served as Bahamut’s consorts. In the centuries since, they have passed to his servants on the Material Plane (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, fear or frightful presence, true seeing. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  PSIONATRIX  Quicksilver boots give you the ability to flash across the battlefield with a moment’s impulse. When you activate these boots, you can move a distance up to your land speed (as if using a move action to do so). This extra movement follows all the normal rules for movement, except that you can move across water or other liquid without falling in (as long as you start and finish on solid ground). You provoke attacks of opportunity as normal for movement, though the rapidity of your travel makes your form blurry, providing concealment against such attacks. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, blur, expeditious retreat. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  CLOTHING  PLATINUM HELM  The tops of these leather boots are folded over to make cuffs, revealing the arcane symbols that are woven with golden thread into the boots’ lining.  CHAPTER 3  knocking them out and taking every last stitch they owned— many of the thieves wore these cloaks (Knowledge [history] or Knowledge [local] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength, jump. Cost to Create: 450 gp, 36 XP, 1 day.  The ancient strips of cloth that make up this ragged shirt are dirty and tattered. Rags of restraint allow you to channel ki power to heal your own injuries. When you activate this item, you must either expend a daily use of your Stunning Fist feat (if you are a monk) or a daily use of your ki power class feature (if you are a ninja). Doing so heals you of damage equal to your monk or ninja level (or the sum of both if you have both classes). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure serious wounds, wholeness of body or ki power. Cost to Create: 1,600 gp, 128 XP, 4 days.  RAPIDSTRIKE BRACERS Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  119  620_10762_Chp3.indd 119  12/21/06 5:38:39 AM  This pair of polished mithral bracers are of simple but elegant craftsmanship, contoured to fit the forearms perfectly.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Rapidstrike bracers increase the accuracy of a monk’s flurry of blows. When you activate these bracers, you gain a +2 competence bonus on attack rolls made as part of a flurry of blows until the end of your turn. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, keen edge. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  Reach gauntlets  REINS OF ASCENSION Rending gauntlets  Repelling gauntlets  These sturdy leather reins are stitched with images of horses soaring through the air.  REACH GAUNTLETS  Illus. by J. Zhang  Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — Each of these gauntlets bears a brass plate set with a faceted pale blue crystal on the back of the hand. If you are a psionic character, reach gauntlets allow you to temporarily create a telekinetic extension of your normal attacks. You must spend 1 power point to activate the gauntlets, effectively extending your normal reach by 5 feet for all melee attacks you make until the end of your turn. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mage hand or extend reach (CP 89). Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  REARGUARD’S CAPE Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. Emblazoned upon the white cloth of this cloak is an azure shield with two crossed black swords in front of it.  120  If you are a marshal (MH 11), a rearguard’s cape provides you with a potent ability whenever you and your allies are outnumbered. If the number of visible, active enemies within 60 feet of you exceeds  620_10762_Chp3.indd 120  Price (Item Level): 3,300 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  the number of your visible, active allies (including yourself) within 60 feet, you can activate this cape. While it is active, the bonus granted by your minor and major auras improves by 2. This benefit lasts for 10 rounds or until you and your allies are no longer outnumbered. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s splendor. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 160 XP, 2 days.  RECIPROCAL BRACERS Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — These dark adamantine bracers are slightly difficult to separate, as if a magical field attracts them to one another. Warriors tired of taking more damage than they deal out appreciate the power of reciprocal bracers, which allow them to turn their enemies’ powerful strikes against them. If you score a hit in melee against someone who scored a critical hit or sneak attack against you since your last turn, you can activate these bracers to automatically consider your attack roll a critical threat. You must still confirm the critical hit as normal. This ability functions two times per day.  These reins allow your mount to briefly break the bonds of gravity. Reins of ascension have 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants your mount a benefit as described below. 1 charge: +10 competence bonus on Jump checks for 10 rounds. 2 charges: Fly at normal land speed (average maneuverability) for 5 rounds. 3 charges: Fly at double normal land speed (perfect maneuverability) for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fly, jump. Cost to Create: 1,650 gp, 132 XP, 4 days.  RELIQUARY HOLY SYMBOL Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: — Weight: — This hollow holy symbol holds a pinch of dust and a fragment of bone. As the repository of a tiny fragment of a long-dead high priest of a particular deity, a reliquary holy symbol functions just like any other holy symbol. In addition, for each of the following prerequisites that you meet, the holy symbol grants you one additional daily use of your turn or rebuke undead ability. • At least 5 ranks in Knowledge (religion) • Improved Turning feat • At least one divine feat (CD 77) Each reliquary holy symbol is crafted for a specific deity and is only useful to characters dedicated to that deity (or in the  12/21/06 5:38:44 AM  case of a character who isn’t devoted to a specific deity, whose alignment matches that of the deity). For example, a reliquary holy symbol of Heironeous can be used by any cleric of Heironeous, or by any lawful good character. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, turn undead. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  These heavy, fingerless leather gloves bear shining adamantine bands across the knuckles. These masterwork spiked gauntlets allow you to tear the flesh of any creature you strike with at least two weapons. If you deal damage to a creature with at least two different weapons or natural attacks on your turn, you can activate rending gauntlets to deal an extra 2d6 points of damage with the second attack. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shatter. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp (plus 610 gp for masterwork spiked gauntlets), 120 XP, 3 days.  REPELLING GAUNTLETS Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — Dark birds of prey, four small chains, and a black-and-yellow checkered field adorn these leather gloves. Inspired by the spells of the legendary wizard Bigby, these gloves help keep enemies at a safe distance. You can activate repelling gauntlets only when a visible enemy moves into a square adjacent to you. That enemy must attempt a DC 17 Reflex save; if this fails, it is immediately pushed 5 feet away from you and it loses any remaining movement allowed in that action (though it can use additional actions to move farther). For example, if a wolf (speed 50 feet) moved 30 feet into a square adjacent to you,  620_10762_Chp3.indd 121  RETRIBUTIVE AMULET Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. This inch-wide disk bears a large red crystal in its center. Tiny carvings around the crystal show an endless march of angels and demons at war. You can activate a retributive amulet immediately after another creature has dealt damage to you with a melee attack. That creature takes damage equal to half the damage it dealt to you. This damage is of the same type (or types). This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shield other. Cost to Create: 4,600 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  RIDING BOOTS Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These calf-high boots are made of smooth, supple leather and have pointed toes. They are unadorned except for a pair of shining, silver spurs that seem to leave a tracery of light behind them. Riding boots react to your mount and correct it when necessary, almost without your guidance. While mounted, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Ride checks made during combat, plus the benefit of the Ride-By Attack feat, even if you lack the prerequisites for it. In addition, if you have the Spirited Charge feat, any charge attacks you make while mounted and wielding a lance deal ×4 damage on a critical hit (instead of the normal ×3).  RING OF ADAMANTINE TOUCH Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — Three strips of adamantine form this simple band. The inner strip has a brushed metal finish, while the outer strips are polished to a shine.  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 3,610 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Ride-By Attack, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  CHAPTER 3  RENDING GAUNTLETS  and it failed its save against the effect, you would push it 5 feet away from you in any direction and it would lose the remaining 20 feet of that move action. It could then use another move action, if it still had one, to close the remaining distance. If the wolf were charging, its entire full-round action would be wasted. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Bigby’s interposing hand. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  While you wear this ring, your melee attacks (whether natural or with a weapon) are treated as adamantine for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, touch of adamantine (BoED 110). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  RING OF ANTIVENOM Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — A tiny, speckled mushroom grows from the tip of this granite ring. Once per day, you can activate the ring to gain the benefit of a neutralize poison effect. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, neutralize poison. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  RING OF ARCANE MIGHT Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) no school Activation: — Weight: — This bronze ring is forged in the shape of a serpent devouring its own tail. While wearing a ring of arcane might, you gain a +1 bonus to your arcane caster level for the purpose of spell penetration checks, caster level checks, and all  121  12/21/06 5:38:48 AM  level-based variables of any arcane spells you cast. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, limited wish. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 1,100 XP, 20 days.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  RING OF ARMING Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This perfectly smooth adamantine ring bears a massive turquoise carved in the shape of a heavily armored knight. When you activate a ring of arming, any armor or weapons you currently wear disappear and are stored magically within the ring, and any armor or weapons currently stored within the ring appear in the appropriate places on your body (items that must be held appear at your feet if you don’t have free hands). Prerequisites: Forge Ring, shrink item. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  RING OF AVOIDANCE Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This solid gold ring is set with emeralds that run all around the outside of its band. A ring of avoidance protects you with a nearly impassable shield of invisible force. Three times per day, upon activating the ring, you gain a +20 deflection bonus to Armor Class that lasts until the beginning of your next turn. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, shield. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  RING OF BRIEF BLESSING Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command); see text Weight: — The clear crystal set into this silver ring glows faintly with a holy light.  122  620_10762_Chp3.indd 122  A ring of brief blessing, which functions only if you are good-aligned, allows your attacks to pierce the defenses of evil foes. When you activate this ring, choose a single melee weapon you hold (or your unarmed strike). Until the end of your turn, that weapon is considered both magic and good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming the damage reduction of an evil creature, as well as for the purpose of affecting incorporeal evil creatures. A ring of brief blessing functions once per day. Once it is activated, its glow fades. However, while wearing the ring you can expend a turn undead attempt as a standard (command) action to recharge it (which also restores its glow). Prerequisites: Forge Ring, bless weapon. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  RING OF COMMUNICATION Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: Free (mental) Weight: — Each of these identical silver rings is inscribed with the Draconic word for friendship. When you activate a ring of communication, for the next minute you can clearly hear any words spoken by anyone within 1 mile who is wearing another ring of communication to which you are attuned. The volume of the speech and the background noise at either end make no difference; whispers are audible above even the sounds of combat. Any two or more ring wearers need only touch their rings together (a standard action) and speak the command word in unison to attune the rings to each other. Any number of rings can become attuned to one another in this manner, so long as all are touched together at the same time. A ring remains attuned to the others until you attune it to a different ring. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, detect thoughts. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  RING OF THE DARKHIDDEN Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) illusion Activation: — Weight: —  More than a dozen etchings of closed eyes circle this tarnished silver ring. You are invisible to darkvision, although you are fully visible in normal light. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, invisibility. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  RING OF DIVERGENCE Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — and immediate (mental) Weight: — This hefty ring of twisting metal splits several times and turns back upon itself. A ring of divergence provides resistance 10 against a specific type of energy (acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic), determined when it is created. Once per day, if you are targeted by a spell of 3rd level or lower with the same descriptor as the energy type the ring protects against, you can activate the ring as an immediate action to reflect the spell back at the caster, as if spell turning had been cast upon you. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, resist energy, spell turning. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 18 days.  RING OF DRAGON FRIENDSHIP Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) enchantment Activation: — or standard (command) Weight: Varies This silver ring is forged in the shape of a dragon biting its own tail. While wearing a ring of dragon friendship, you gain a +5 enhancement bonus on Diplomacy checks made to influence the attitudes of creatures of the dragon type. In addition, once per day, you can activate the ring to produce a suggestion effect directed at a creature of the dragon type. The effect functions as a 9th-level spell (as if affected by the Heighten Spell feat), and its Will save DC is 23. If you or one of your allies attacks a dragon in any way (including using the ring’s suggestion power) while you wear the ring, it loses its powers for 24 hours, though any active suggestion effect continues working while the ring is inactive.  12/21/06 5:38:49 AM  Prerequisites: Forge Ring, Heighten Spell, dominate monster, suggestion. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  RING OF ENTROPIC DEFLECTION  This plain silver band is set with a small sapphire, which shimmers faintly when invested with essentia.  A scene of a shattered ship and wooden debris floating on the waves covers this thick driftwood band.  Any creature that has an essentia pool can transfer 1 point of essentia from its pool into a ring of essentia simply by touching it and willing the transfer to occur (a standard action). Doing so reduces the size of the donor’s essentia pool by 1. The ring can hold no more than 1 point of essentia. At any time within the next 24 hours, you can use this essentia as if it were part of your own essentia pool—even if you don’t have essentia of your own—simply by willing its release while you wear the ring. The stored essentia returns to its original owner automatically after you use it, or after 24 hours if it remains unused. Alternatively, the donor of the stored essentia can reclaim it earlier by touching the ring and willing it to return (a standard action). Prerequisites: Forge Ring, essentia pool, soul boon (MoI 104). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  You float upon any liquid or similar surface, and cannot swim below the surface. If you are underwater when you put on a ring of floating, you rise toward the surface at a speed of 30 feet per round. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, float (EPH 108). Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  RING OF THE FORCEWALL Price (Item Level): 5,100 gp (10th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This ring is carved from clear quartz and is engraved with complex magic sigils. A ring of the forcewall creates a small, nigh-impenetrable barrier. This ring has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at  Illus. by E. Widermann  A ring of entropic deflection provides a mobile wearer with protection against ranged attacks. At the end of any turn, if you are at least 10 feet from the point where you started your turn, this ring creates a field of warping energy that lasts until the start of your next turn. This field functions as an entropic shield spell. Any ranged attacks directed at you that require an attack roll have a 20% miss chance. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. If you also wear a magic item that provides a bonus to your speed, the miss chance provided by the ring increases to 50%. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, entropic shield. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 1st Aura: Faint; (DC 15) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  CLOTHING  This platinum ring is set with a large, hypnotic white opal.  RING OF FLOATING  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: —; see text Weight: —  RING OF ESSENTIA  Ring of ﬂoating Ring of entropic deﬂection Ring of avoidance Ring of adamantine touch Bone ring  123  620_10762_Chp3.indd 123  12/21/06 5:38:51 AM  CHAPTER 3  dawn. Spending 1 or more charges creates a 10-foot-square vertical wall of force (as the spell) up to 30 feet away from you. The number of charges spent determines the duration of the wall. 1 charge: 2 rounds. 2 charges: 3 rounds. 3 charges: 4 rounds. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, wall of force. Cost to Create: 2,550 gp, 204 XP, 6 days.  CLOTHING  RING OF FOUR WINDS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: —  Illus. by E. Widermann  Four clouds, each a different shade of green or blue, adorn this simple wooden ring. The faces of four old men puffing up their cheeks are also carved into the sides. When you activate a ring of the four winds, it creates gusts of wind that grant you a +2 deflection bonus to AC against a single attack. Alternatively, you can activate it to use a feather fall effect on yourself. This ring functions a total of four times per day. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, feather fall, gust of wind, shield of faith. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Ring of greater counterspells  RING OF GREATER COUNTERSPELLS Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: — This white gold ring is forged in a braided pattern. A single ruby set in its center flickers and pulses with magical energy. A ring of greater counterspells can hold a spell of 1st through 6th level, much like a ring of counterspells. You cannot cast a stored spell out of the ring, but should that spell ever be cast upon you, it is immediately countered, as a counterspell action, requiring no action (or even knowledge) on your part. This use causes the ruby stone to flash once and uses up the stored spell. Once it is gone, a new spell (or the same one as before) can be placed into the ring. If you are a spellcaster capable of countering a spell on your own, you can also access the ring’s secondary ability. Once per day as an immediate action, you can attempt to counter a single spell cast by a spellcaster you can see, provided he is within 100 feet. Like the ring’s other ability, this one requires no preparation or knowledge on your part. You need not make a Spellcraft check to identify the spell being cast, and the spell you use to counterspell can be of any level. This counterspell attempt functions like greater  Ring of mystic lightning  Ring of piercing spells  dispel magic used to counter a spell, except that you add your caster level to the counterspell check (maximum +20). Thus, a 12th-level wizard wearing a ring of greater counterspells would roll 1d20+12 when activating this ability. When you activate this secondary effect, the braids of white gold seem to twist and writhe on your finger, and the metal glows faintly is if it were growing hot, although you feel no heat. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, greater dispel magic, imbue with spell ability. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  RING OF THE ICY SOUL Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — There seems to be little physical substance to this ring. It resembles a fine, circular sliver of fragile ice surrounded by a blue-white mist of incredible cold. You gain resistance to cold 20, but you also gain vulnerability to fire and lose any resistance or immunity to fire you already have. You take 1-1/2 times the normal amount of damage from fire, regardless of whether a saving throw is allowed, or if the save is a success or a failure. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, mantle of the icy soul (SC 138). Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 720 XP, 18 days.  Ring of nine lives  Ring of negatice protection  124  620_10762_Chp3.indd 124  12/21/06 5:38:56 AM  Price (Item Level): 11,500 gp (13th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 61,000 (18th) Caster Level: 16th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) no school  A ring of mystic defiance protects you from damaging magical effects. When you activate the ring, you ignore up to 10 points of damage dealt by a spell or spell-like ability. You can activate the ring after you learn the damage a spell or spell-like ability will deal to you, but before the damage is actually dealt. This ability functions three times per day. This ability does not protect you from other magical effects (such as those generated by magic items, unless they specifically mimic spells). For example, the ring wouldn’t protect you from the extra damage dealt by a flaming sword, but it would protect you from a fireball cast from a scroll, wand, or other item. If you also wear a magic item that grants an enhancement bonus to your Intelligence or Charisma, you can add half that item’s bonus as an insight bonus on your Fortitude saves against spells and spell-like abilities (up to a maximum bonus of +3). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, spell immunity. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp, 300 XP, 8 days.  This ring is crafted from interwoven bands of copper and electrum. When you activate a ring of lightning flashes, it emits a powerful blast of lightning that deals 5d6 points of electricity damage (Reflex DC 13 half) to all creatures within 5 feet (other than yourself). Any creature that is in physical contact with you at the time (grappling, engulfing, swallowing, or the like) receives no saving throw against the blast. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, lightning bolt. Cost to Create: 5,750 gp, 460 XP, 12 days.  Several interlocking rings of many different metals—including adamantine, gold, and mithral—seem to thrum faintly with power. This item functions as a ring of master artifice, except a greater ring provides you with one bonus 5th-level infusion and one bonus 6th-level infusion (instead of one bonus 3rd-level infusion and one bonus 4th-level infusion). Prerequisites: Forge Ring. Cost to Create: 30,500 gp, 2,440 XP, 61 days.  Ring of master artiﬁce  RING OF MASTER ARTIFICE Price (Item Level): 25,000 (15th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 14th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) no school Activation: —; see text Weight: — These thin, interlocking rings are made of different metals, including silver, adamantine, mithral, and platinum. A ring of master artifice functions only if you can imbue infusions (see the EBERRON Campaign Setting). Assembling the ring from its various components requires 5 minutes and a successful DC 22 Intelligence check, which you can attempt any number of times. Once assembled, a ring of master artifice must be worn for 24 hours for its magic to take effect. After that time, you gain the ring’s benefit every time you concentrate to regain your daily allotment of infusions. The ring increases the number of infusions you can imbue daily. A ring of master artifice provides one bonus 3rd-level infusion and one bonus 4th-level infusion. Prerequisites: Forge Ring. Cost to Create: 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days.  RING OF MYSTIC FIRE  RING OF MASTER ARTIFICE, LESSER Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) no school This item functions as a ring of master artifice, except a lesser ring provides you with one bonus 1st-level infusion and one bonus 2nd-level infusion (instead of one bonus 3rd-level infusion and one bonus 4th-level infusion). Prerequisites: Forge Ring. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  RING OF MYSTIC DEFIANCE Price (Item Level): 7,500 gp (11th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) and — Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 7,500 gp (11th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: —  CLOTHING  This white gold ring bears a square-cut ruby. Arcane runes are inscribed around its band.  CHAPTER 3  RING OF MASTER ARTIFICE, GREATER  Illus. by E. Widermann  RING OF LIGHTNING FLASHES  This silver ring seems to smolder with an inner heat. A ring of mystic fire provides a boost to your fi re-based spells. When casting spells with the fire descriptor, you gain a +1 competence bonus to caster level. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this ring has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants a bonus to the amount of damage you deal with the next fire spell you cast before the end of your turn. (If the fire spell doesn’t normally deal fire damage, this expenditure has no effect). 1 charge: +2d6 fire damage. 2 charges: +3d6 fire damage. 3 charges: +4d6 fire damage. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, fireball or flame strike. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp, 300 XP, 8 days.  125  620_10762_Chp3.indd 125  12/21/06 5:39:01 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  RING OF MYSTIC HEALING  RING OF NEGATIVE PROTECTION  Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 36,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — Weight: —  This steel ring glimmers with a faint golden light.  This gleaming, white gold ring is set with a single piece of polished jet.  A ring of mystic healing provides a boost to your healing spells. When casting cure spells, you gain a +1 competence bonus to your caster level. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this ring has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants a bonus to the damage healed by the next cure spell you cast before the end of your turn. 1 charge: +2d6 points of healing. 2 charges: +3d6 points of healing. 3 charges: +4d6 points of healing. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, cure serious wounds. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  You can ignore the 1d6 points of damage dealt by negative-dominant planes, such as the Negative Energy Plane, each round. You also cannot gain negative levels. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, protection from negative energy (LM 70). Cost to Create: 18,000 gp, 1,440 XP, 36 days.  RING OF MYSTIC LIGHTNING Price (Item Level): 7,500 gp (11th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: — This copper ring occasionally emits tiny sparks. A ring of mystic lightning provides a boost to your electricity-based spells. When casting spells with the electricity descriptor, you gain a +1 competence bonus to caster level. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this ring has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants a bonus to the damage dealt by the next electricity spell you cast before the end of your turn. (If the spell doesn’t normally deal electricity damage, this expenditure has no effect). 1 charge: +2d6 electricity damage. 2 charges: +3d6 electricity damage. 3 charges: +4d6 electricity damage. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, call lightning or lightning bolt. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp, 300 XP, 8 days.  RING OF NINE LIVES Price (Item Level): 45,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) no school Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: — The stylized face of a contemplative cat adorns this ivory ring. Two tiny emeralds glimmer within the cat’s eyes. If you ever drop to 0 hit points or below, a ring of nine lives expends one of its charges to heal 20 points of damage. This effect triggers automatically, requiring no action on your part. Also, once per day as an immediate action, you can expend a charge when you fail a saving throw to treat the saving throw as a success. A ring of nine lives has 9 charges when created, but most are discovered with only 2d4 charges left. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, heal, limited wish. Cost to Create: 22,500 gp, 1,800 XP, 45 days.  RING OF PIERCING SPELLS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  This blood-red, metallic signet ring bears the emblem of a black skull with wands crossed beneath it. A ring of piercing spells allows you to deal additional damage with your spells against a nearby, distracted target. When you activate this ring, the next melee touch spell you cast against an enemy you are flanking deals an extra 2d6 points of damage. Touch spells that don’t normally deal hit point damage don’t gain any benefit from this ability. If you don’t cast a touch spell that deals hit point damage before the end of your turn, you gain no benefit from the ring. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, inflict moderate wounds, sneak attack. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  RING OF POSITIVE PROTECTION Price (Item Level): 36,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — Weight: — This plain black iron ring is set with a single perfect diamond. You can ignore the blinding effect of positive-dominant planes, such as the Positive Energy Plane. You also do not gain the fast healing ability usually conferred by such a plane, nor do you gain additional hit points when you reach your normal maximum. Furthermore, spells that channel positive energy—typically cure spells—have no effect on you. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, protection from positive energy (LM 70). Cost to Create: 18,000 gp, 1,440 XP, 36 days.  RING OF SELF-SUFFICIENCY Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This fragile, crystal ring is pale green and etched in a swirling pattern that appears to move constantly.  126  620_10762_Chp3.indd 126  12/21/06 5:39:03 AM  You gain a +10 competence bonus on Autohypnosis checks. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, Autohypnosis (EPH 36) 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  RING OF SILENT SPELLS  RING OF SOULBOUND PROTECTION Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: —  RING OF SOULBOUND PROTECTION, GREATER Price (Item Level): 26,000 gp (16th) Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) abjuration Crafted of braided mithral, this finely crafted ring is studded with perfect sapphires. This item functions as a ring of soulbound protection, except the maximum bonus to AC you can gain with this ring is +5 instead of +3. A greater ring of soulbound protection (set with four sapphires) has a maximum essentia capacity of 4. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, shield of faith, essentia pool 4. Cost to Create: 13,000 gp, 1,040 XP, 26 days.  This simple gold band looks like a tiny armored girdle set with small spheres of silver. A ring of spell-battle informs you of all spellcasting that occurs within 60 feet of you, as well as allowing you to attempt a Spellcraft check (DC 15 + spell level) to identify the spell being cast (even if you can’t see its casting or effect). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Once per day, when you succeed in identifying a spell in this manner, you can activate the ring to counterspell that spell as if with dispel magic, or change the target of the spell to any target within 60 feet of you. If you choose an illegal target (because of the spell’s range limitation or other restrictions), the spell functions normally and the effect is wasted. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, detect magic, dispel magic, spell turning, Spellcraft 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  RING OF THUNDERCLAPS Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: See text Weight: —  Illus. by E. Widermann  When you activate a ring of silent spells, it creates a silence effect, as the spell, centered on you. While this effect lasts, you can cast up to three spells of 3rd level or lower without verbal components (as though using the Silent Spell feat, except that the spells do not require a higher level spell slot or increased casting time). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, Silent Spell, silence. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 14th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Activation: — and immediate (mental) Weight: —  CLOTHING  Sculpted teeth surround the soft silk padding of this copper band, like a mouth biting down on a gag.  While wearing a ring of soulbound protection, you gain a +1 deflection bonus to AC. In addition, the ring serves as a receptacle for your essentia, much like a soulmeld does. Every point of essentia invested in the ring increases its deflection bonus to AC by 1 (up to a maximum bonus of +3). Each ring of soulbound protection has an essentia capacity. The maximum number of essentia points that can be invested in it equals this value or your normal essentia capacity (MoI 19), whichever is lower. A ring of soulbound protection (set with two sapphires) has a maximum essentia capacity of 2. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, shield of faith, essentia pool 2. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  RING OF SPELL-BATTLE  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) illusion Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  This sturdy band of mithral is set with tiny sapphires.  Ring of the darkhidden  Ring of forcewall Ring of water breathing  Ring of vanishing Ring of the icy soul  Ring of thunderclaps  127  620_10762_Chp3.indd 127  12/21/06 5:39:05 AM  Whenever a creature scores a critical hit on you with a melee weapon, this ring unleashes an arc of divine energy that deals 5d6 points of damage to the creature that scored the critical hit. This ability functions three times per day. Lore: Originally given by archons to their mortal champions in the lost ages of the world, the oldest of these rings were ancient when the elves first began to record their histories. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, vengeance halo (BoED 111), good alignment. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  This ring is carved from a single piece of lapis lazuli and has a lightning bolt etched along its rim.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  You can activate this ring as a swift (command) action to make a melee touch attack before the end of your turn that deals 1d8+5 points of electricity damage if successful. This ability functions three times per day. Once per day, upon successfully using the ring to damage a target, you can activate a second ability of the ring as a free (command) action to create a powerful thunderclap that mimics a shout spell. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, shocking grasp, shout. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  RING OF WATER BREATHING Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  Illus. by W. England  RING OF UNIVERSAL ENERGY RESISTANCE Price (Item Level): 60,000 gp (18th) (minor); 120,000 gp (21st) (major); 180,000 gp (24th) (greater) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Activation: — Weight: —  This silver ring is shaped to depict a fish biting its own tail. The fish has tiny emeralds for eyes. While wearing this ring, you can breathe freely underwater. This has no effect on your ability to breathe air. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, water breathing. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  This gold ring is imprinted with symbols representing the five energy types. A ring of universal energy resistance functions as a ring of energy resistance (DMG 232) for all types of energy: fire, cold, electricity, acid, and sonic. A minor ring provides resistance 10, a major ring resistance 20, and a greater ring resistance 30. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, resist energy. Cost to Create: 30,000 gp, 2,400 XP, 60 days (minor); 60,000 gp, 4,800 XP, 120 days (major); 90,000 gp, 7,200 XP, 180 days (greater).  RING OF VANISHING Price (Item Level): 30,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Moderate; (DC 21) illusion Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This object is a featureless, clear glass ring. A ring of vanishing allows you to briefly become almost entirely imperceptible. When you activate this ring, you become invisible (as greater invisibility), as well as undetectable by hearing, scent, blindsense, blindsight, or tremorsense, for 2  Robe of arcane might  rounds. Spells or effects that detect invisible creatures (such as see invisibility or true seeing) still function normally. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, greater invisibility. Cost to Create: 15,000 gp, 1,200 XP, 30 days.  RING OF VENGEANCE Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) abjuration Activation: — Weight: — Seven small half-spheres rise from the shining, reflective surface of this golden ring. A ring of vengeance glows softly when worn by a good-aligned creature. Nongood creatures gain no benefit from the ring.  RINGS OF FORCE ARMOR Price (Item Level): 30,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: Ring; see text Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — Weight: — Each of these black iron rings is set with smooth pieces of jet all around its band. This pair of black iron rings must be worn as a set, one on each hand, to function. When so worn, they sheathe you in a field of magical force, granting you a +5 armor bonus to AC. This bonus applies even against incorporeal touch attacks. The sheath is harmful to the touch, dealing 1d4 points of force damage to any creature that successfully strikes you with a nonreach weapon. In addition, your unarmed strikes deal an extra 1d4 points of damage and can affect incorporeal creatures as if they were force effects.  128  620_10762_Chp3.indd 128  12/21/06 5:39:09 AM  Prerequisites: Forge Ring, mage armor, magic weapon, wall of force. Cost to Create: 15,000 gp, 1,200 XP, 30 days.  ROBE OF ARCANE MIGHT  Robe of the inferno  620_10762_Chp3.indd 129  The coal-colored cloth of this robe is decorated with crimson-stitched runes. The runes run around the bottom and up the length of the garment in meandering lines, and are a mixture of arcane formulas and praises to fire written in Ignan. The robe emits a faint odor of brimstone, and a gentle warmth surrounds it. While you wear this robe, it provides you with a +4 armor bonus to AC. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation.  Robe of mysterious conjuration  Robe of retaliation  Illus. by W. England  A robe of arcane might grants you a +4 armor bonus to AC. In addition, each robe is attuned to one of the eight schools of magic, chosen during creation (and identifiable with a successful DC 20 Spellcraft check). When casting a spell from that school, you gain a +1 competence bonus to your caster level.  Price (Item Level): 37,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration, evocation Activation: See text Weight: 1 lb.  CLOTHING  Mystical sigils line the hems of this bulky, thick-shouldered robe. Minuscule gems adorn the cuffs, collar, and hems.  ROBE OF THE INFERNO  The robe can also be activated as a swift (command) action by speaking a word in Ignan that causes four fiery orbs, each about 6 inches in diameter, to spring from the sleeves. They circle slowly around your body at waist height as long as the robe remains active, but don’t interfere with your actions in any way. As long as they are active, they collectively provide light equal to that of a torch and grant you resistance to fire 10. Two times per day, you can send one of the fiery orbs streaking toward a single enemy within 60 feet as a ranged touch attack, which is a standard (command) action. Failure means the orb misses and explodes harmlessly in a shower of sparks. Success means it explodes in a 5-footradius burst around the target, dealing 8d6 points of fire damage and leaving affected creatures dazzled for 1 round (Reflex DC 16 halves the damage and negates the dazzled condition). Lore: The first robe of the inferno was crafted by an elf evoker named Killaith Marcaun, who was badly burned in a battle against a large number of summoned thoqqua. Deeply humiliated by the scars  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 21,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mage armor, specialist wizard in the relevant school. Cost to Create: 10,500 gp, 840 XP, 21 days.  129  12/21/06 5:39:13 AM  they left, she constructed the robe so that she, too, could harness the power of fire (Knowledge [arcana or history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mage armor, resist energy, scorching ray. Cost to Create: 18,500 gp, 1,480 XP, 37 days.  ROCK BOOTS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: — and free (command) Weight: 1 lb.  CHAPTER 3  ROBE OF MYSTERIOUS CONJURATION  Made from heavy leather, these boots have solid iron plating along the toes and ankles. A smoky crystal shard is set into the back of each boot, a few inches above the heel.  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  Rock boots feel rigid, though they do not significantly impede movement. They grant you a +4 bonus on Strength checks made to resist being bull rushed or tripped when standing on the ground. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When activated, rock boots allow you to ignore any additional movement costs for moving over difficult terrain for 1 round. This effect functions five times per day. Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Wondrous Item, planar binding. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Illus. by E. Cox & C. Critchlow  This robe seems to have depth, as if you were gazing into a portal between worlds, where vague behemoths move at the limit of your vision. A robe of mysterious conjuration intensifies your connection to other planes, linking your mind to the distant realms from which a puissant mage can pluck servants and bind them to his will. Three times per day, you can activate the robe and sacrifice a prepared arcane spell (or arcane spell slot) to summon one or more monsters, as if you had cast a summon monster spell of the same level as the sacrificed spell from your class spell list. The summoned monsters can act immediately. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, summon monster V. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Rogue’s vest  equal to 1d6 points per level of the spell sacrificed. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fire shield. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 7 days.  ROBE OF RETALIATION Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 2 lb.  Healing belt  A robe of retaliation allows you to react to attacks with a burst of magical power. If you are struck by a creature wielding a melee weapon or a natural weapon, you can activate the robe and sacrifice an arcane spell of 1st level or higher to deal damage to your attacker  130  620_10762_Chp3.indd 130  Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This slick-looking black vest is made of supple, well-worked leather. Its buttons are carved of dull black glass and seem to absorb light rather than reflect it.  Desperation chain  An image of a solar eclipse with a blazing corona can be seen on the back of this heavy red robe.  ROGUE’S VEST  While wearing this vest, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks, and a +2 competence bonus on Reflex saves. In addition, if you have the skirmish, sneak attack, or sudden strike ability, you deal an extra 1d6 points of damage when making such an attack. Lore: A halfling arcane trickster named Lena Wanderingeye created the first rogue’s vest. She wore it for many years before she retired from adventuring and joined a caravan. She eventually passed the secret of its creation on to the arcane spellcasters in the caravan (Knowledge [arcana or history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace, invisibility, true strike. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 720 XP, 18 days.  Ruby cincture of immutability  12/21/06 5:39:21 AM  Pendant of joy  Reliquary holy symbol  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Skull plaque Symbol of transﬁguration Scarab of stabilization Safewing emblem  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — This sumptuous red silk sash is feather-light. It is set with a large ruby cabochon surrounded by an embroidered silver circle. Wearing a ruby cincture of immutability provides you with a safeguard against attacks that change your form. Once per day, you can instantly counter any effect that would significantly change your bodily form or composition. Effects that the sash protects against include polymorph, petrification, disintegration, and transformative effects such as the touch of an aboleth’s tentacle or a chaos beast’s attack. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, break enchantment. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  SAFEWING EMBLEM Price (Item Level): 250 gp (2nd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This porcelain pin is sculpted to look like a pair of outstretched white wings. A tiny green stone adorns the center, where the wings meet. If you fall at least 10 feet, a safewing emblem becomes a pair of feathery wings that grant you a feather fall effect, allowing you to descend safely from any height up to 180 feet. When you land, the emblem shatters, its magic expended. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, feather fall. Cost to Create: 125 gp, 10 XP, 1 day.  SANDALS OF SPRINGING Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  The laces of these well-made sandals are bound at the calf by a silver clasp inset with a large, smooth, hemispherical blue crystal.  Illus. by A. Stokes  RUBY CINCTURE OF IMMUTABILITY  Sandals of springing grant you a +10 enhancement bonus on Jump checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, jump or mighty spring (CP 93). Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  SANDALS OF SPRINTING Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. These lightweight sandals are soled with tanned cheetah hide, and the straps are made of dried, braided sinew. When you activate sandals of sprinting, you gain a +30-foot enhancement bonus to your land speed (to a maximum of twice your normal speed) until the start of your next turn. This ability functions three times per day.  131  620_10762_Chp3.indd 131  12/21/06 5:39:27 AM  Rearguard’s cape  Scry shroud  Illus. by C. Critchlow  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Piercer cloak  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, expeditious retreat. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  SCARAB OF INVULNERABILITY Price (Item Level): 40,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This broad adamantine necklace bears a scarab of the same metal, polished to a mirrorlike sheen. A scarab of invulnerability provides you with brief but complete protection from all forms of damage. For 1 round after activating the scarab, you are immune to all forms of damage (including ability damage), whether from weapons, spells, psionic powers, poison, environmental effects, or any other cause. The scarab doesn’t protect you from harmful effects that don’t deal damage. A scarab of invulnerability functions once per day. You must wear a scarab of invulnerability for 24 hours before you can access its abilities. If it is taken off, it becomes inactive until worn for an additional 24 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, iron body. Cost to Create: 20,000 gp, 1,600 XP, 40 days.  SCARAB OF STABILIZATION Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — Weight: — This solid gold scarab has obsidian chips for eyes. Glyphs of protection and health are carved into its carapace. A button at the base of its abdomen makes its legs clench or release, allowing it to be worn as a cloak clasp or a decorative piece of jewelry. If your hit points drop below 0 but you are still alive (above –10 hit points), a scarab of stabilization automatically stabilizes you. You are still unconscious from your wounds, but you need not make a stabilization check each round to prevent further hit point loss. If another wound causes your hit points to drop lower, the scarab automatically stabilizes you again at your new hit point total, provided that it is still between –1 and –9. If a wound would drop you to –10 hit points or lower, the secondary power of the scarab activates automatically. You do not die, but your hit point total becomes –1, and you automatically stabilize. This power functions only once—the scarab crumbles into dust as soon as this ability is used.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, contingency, cure light wounds. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  SCENTBLINDER Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) illusion Activation: — Weight: — This battered pouch of rough burlap dangles from a tattered cord. A strong aroma of herbs and vegetable decay emanates through the fabric. A scentblinder masks your odor, making the scent ability ineffective against you. Creatures cannot track you or detect your location by scent. It also masks the effect of extraordinary, spell-like, and supernatural abilities that you possess that are based on scent, such as a troglodyte’s stench. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, persistent image. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  SCOUT’S HEADBAND Price (Item Level): 3,400 gp (8th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: —  132  620_10762_Chp3.indd 132  12/21/06 5:39:31 AM  This tattered strip of cloth is strangely resilient, and when you hold it, elven runes appear along its length.  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — The smell of fresh graves and decaying lilies clings to this vest.  Price (Item Level): 3,700 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) illusion Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  SHADOW VEIL Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: — Weight: — This greenish, indistinct robe is designed to envelop the entire body. A shadow veil is crafted from the essence of the undead creatures known as shadows. While wearing it, you gain a +1 deflection bonus to AC. In addition, while in shadowy areas, you are treated as if you had concealment against creatures lacking darkvision, blindsight, or some other sensory ability that does not rely on light. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Knowledge (religion) 5 ranks, create undead. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  SCRY SHROUD Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) illusion Activation: — and immediate (mental) Weight: — The black lining of this nondescript gray cloak seems to absorb both light and sound.  CLOTHING  SHADOW MANIPLE  Actually a small rift between the Plane of Shadow and the Material Plane, a shadow maniple allows characters adept at shadow magic to derive healing from their use of such magic. When you cast a spell with the shadow descriptor, or whenever you cast a mystery (see the shadowcaster class, ToM 111), you can activate the maniple to heal damage equal to the level of the spell or mystery. A shadow maniple functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shadow conjuration or any apprentice mystery. Cost to Create: 1,850 gp, 148 XP, 4 days.  CHAPTER 3  Sometimes jokingly dubbed “gravedigger’s shirts,” these items help characters who battle undead. When activated, a sepulchral vest grants you a +5 sacred bonus on saves against any effect generated by an undead creature for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, death ward. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  This wristband seethes with ever-shifting shadows. Its touch feels like frozen silk.  Illus. by W. England  A scout’s headband grants you a +2 competence bonus on Spot checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this circlet has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges enhances your visual acuity as described below. 1 charge: You gain darkvision out to 60 feet for 1 hour. 2 charges: You can see invisible creatures and objects (as see invisibility) for 10 minutes. 3 charges: You gain true seeing (as the spell) for 1 minute. Lore: The runes appearing on the headband are taken from the Saga of Filix, a great elf scout from long ago (Knowledge [history] DC 10). Filix bargained with Corellon for unparalleled powers of vision, but the gift came with a curse: The scout could see the deaths of all his friends as well (Knowledge [history] DC 15). Driven nearly mad by the ghostly perceptions haunting him, Filix eventually fled society entirely, living out the rest of his long days alone in the wilderness (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, see invisibility, darkvision, true seeing. Cost to Create: 1,700 gp, 136 XP, 4 days.  SEPULCHRAL VEST  SHIFTWEAVE  While wearing a scry shroud, you gain a +5 competence bonus on saves against divination spells. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Additionally, if you see or otherwise detect a magical sensor created by a scrying spell, you can activate the cloak to become invisible (as the invisibility spell) for 10 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, nondetection, invisibility. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 5 lb. This otherwise plain-looking set of clothing seems to have gossamer threads woven randomly into the fabric.  Shadow veil  When you activate shiftweave, it changes your garb to resemble any of five specific  133  620_10762_Chp3.indd 133  12/21/06 5:39:35 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Illus. by E. Cox  Shirt of angels  outfits designated during its creation. Shiftweave has no effect on any armor you wear (nor can it mimic armor) and does not change the effect of any magical clothing you wear. Lore: Though originally created for wealthy socialites who wanted to avoid wearing the same gown to the gala, shiftweave is also useful to spies and assassins (Knowledge [nobility and royalty] DC 10). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, disguise self. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  SHIRT OF ANGELS Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This shirt is composed entirely of soft, white feathers like those from an angel’s wings. Despite its composition, a shirt of angels is as durable as the sturdiest homespun. This item grants you damage reduction 3/evil. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, righteous might. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  SHIRT OF BONE Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation  134  620_10762_Chp3.indd 134  Shirt of bone  Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This sturdy cotton shirt has bone stays that reinforce its shape. This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/bludgeoning. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  SHIRT OF CHAINS Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This silken shirt is looped with lengths of fine silver chain in an intricate pattern. This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/piercing. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  SHIRT OF DEMONSKIN Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This leathery shirt is composed of bits of demonskin sewn together with a rough stitch.  Shirt of demonskin  This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/good. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, righteous might. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  SHIRT OF THE FEY Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This light blue shirt is made of material so fine it seems like gossamer. Embroidery along the neckline and cuffs depicts leaves and flowers. The faint scent of grass envelops it. When donned, a shirt of the fey fades away, becoming almost impossible to see. This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/cold iron. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  SHIRT OF THE INEVITABLE Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 10 lb. This metal sheath covers the chest and shoulders  12/21/06 5:39:39 AM  This shirt is actually the metallic chestplate from one of the constructs of Mechanus—a noble inevitable. It grants you damage reduction 3/chaotic. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, righteous might. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  SHIRT OF IRONSKIN  This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/adamantine. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  SHIRT OF THE LEECH  This blood-red, silk shirt looks as though it was tailored to be form-fitting.  Shirt of the leech  620_10762_Chp3.indd 135  Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This shirt is made of gleaming, silvery material that feels like cool silk to the touch. This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/silver. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Shirt of the fey  This sturdy leather shirt is laced with a green leather cord. This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/magic. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  SHIRT OF SLAADSKIN Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This lightweight, brightly colored shirt is made from a rubbery, pebbled hide. This shirt is made from the skin of a slaad. It grants you damage reduction 3/lawful. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, righteous might. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Shirt of slaadskin  Illus. by E. Cox  Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb.  SHIRT OF THE MOON  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 3 lb.  CLOTHING  This shirt is made of interlocking iron plates.  SHIRT OF RESILIENCE  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 10 lb.  Whenever a healing spell of 4th level or lower is cast within 30 feet of you, you instantly recognize the spell being cast. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. As an immediate action, you can activate a shirt of the leech to gain the effect of any healing spell cast within 30 feet of you, instead of the spell affecting its intended target. If the spell would normally affect more than one creature, you choose which target does not gain the effect. You must have line of sight to both the caster and the target to use this effect. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mass cure light wounds. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  135  12/21/06 5:39:43 AM  SHIRT OF THE TREANT Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  This vest is made of woven leaves and laced with a strong vine. The leaves that make up the fabric of this shirt were gathered from living treants. This shirt grants you damage reduction 3/slashing. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  SHROUD OF SCALES Price (Item Level): 24,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 10 lb. This opaque, reticulated shawl appears to contain hundreds of polychromatic dragon scales stitched into its fibers. Deep, flowing sleeves hang from long arm slits cut into the main body of the shawl. While wearing a shroud of scales, you can use your arms and hands normally and see through the garment despite its apparent opacity. You gain damage reduction 5/magic and are immune to a dragon’s frightful presence. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  SILKSLICK BELT Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — This belt is crafted from a thousand strands of silk, which are dyed the color of midnight. A silkslick belt is a boon to burglars and contortionists, but also to anyone who wants to avoid being caught in a tight spot. You can attempt an Escape Artist check to escape from a grapple or pin as a move action (rather than as a standard action).  This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, once per day, you can activate a silkslick belt to gain a +10 competence bonus on the next Escape Artist check you begin before the end of your next turn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, grease. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  SKIRMISHER BOOTS Price (Item Level): 3,200 gp (8th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. These comfortable boots are made from soft doeskin. Scouts (CAd 10) prize skirmisher boots, but any character can use them to increase combat prowess in a mobile battle. You gain a +2 bonus on damage rolls when you make a skirmish attack. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. A character without the skirmish class feature does not gain this benefit. In addition, you can activate skirmisher boots to make a single extra melee or ranged attack using your full base attack bonus. You can only activate this ability if you have already moved at least 10 feet from the space where you started your turn. Movement while mounted does not allow you to activate the boots. This benefit does not require the skirmish class feature and can be activated two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste. Cost to Create: 1,600 gp, 128 XP, 4 days.  SKULL PLAQUE Price (Item Level): 6,200 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 2 lb. The image of a grinning skull is engraved upon this ivory amulet. Black enamel inlays form a shield-shaped background. Undead creatures take a –2 penalty on attack rolls against the wearer of a skull plaque. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. A skull plaque also has two additional abilities, each of which can be acti-  vated once per day: death knell and detect undead. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, death knell, detect undead, prayer. Cost to Create: 3,100 gp, 248 XP, 7 days.  SNAKEBLOOD TOOTH Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: — This tiny chunk of ivory resembles the fang of a snake. When placed into an empty tooth socket, a snakeblood tooth adheres to your jawbone until removed. Placing or removing a tooth requires a standard action. A snakeblood tooth grants you a +5 alchemical bonus on saves against ingested poisons. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, a snakeblood tooth has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges enhances a tooth’s protective qualities as described below. 1 charge: You gain a +5 alchemical bonus on saves against all types of poison for 3 rounds. 2 charges: You and up to three allies within 10 feet of you gain a +5 alchemical bonus on saves against poison for 3 rounds. 3 charges: You gain immunity to poison for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, neutralize poison. Cost to Create: 675 gp, 54 XP, 2 days.  SOULSMITE GAUNTLETS Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Free (command) Weight: 2 lb. Each of these white steel gauntlets has a smooth cerulean gem mounted on the wrist. Soulsmite gauntlets allow a soulborn (MoI 25) to channel the power of a soulmeld into her smite opposition ability. When you use smite opposition, you can select one soulmeld you have shaped. All essentia invested in that soulmeld becomes  136  620_10762_Chp3.indd 136  12/21/06 5:39:47 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Illus. by W. England  Whenever your spare hand is not carrying an item, you gain a +2 competence bonus on Climb, Essentia helm Escape Artist, and grapple checks. Without further augmentation from an infusion (see below), a spare hand cannot do anything Soulstone other than hold an item—it cannot wield a weapon, retrieve a stored item, or perform any other task. If you power a spare hand with a 1st-level infusion (see the EBERRON Campaign Setting), it gains additional qualities. Once per round, you can command the hand to stow an item or retrieve a stowed item (including a weapon) as a free action. If you instead expend a 2nd-level infusion, the spare hand gains the above ability and can also hold a buckler or light shield, freeing your normal hand while still providing a bonus to AC from the shield. You still incur any armor Soulsmite gauntlets check penalty or other drawbacks of holding the shield, and are subject to normal penalties if you are not proficient with the shield. If you also wear a magic item that grants If you expend a 3rd-level infusion, a an enhancement bonus to your Wisdom, spare hand gains all the above abilities a soulstone also allows you to unshape a and becomes capable of wielding a light SOULSTONE soulmeld bound to your brow chakra and weapon. You can command a spare hand to Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) immediately reshape another soulmeld, make off-hand attacks with this weapon Body Slot: Face even binding it to your brow chakra if you as if you were wielding it. A spare hand Caster Level: 9th want. This ability requires a full-round attacks using your normal attack modiAura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation action and functions once per day. fier plus any appropriate penalties for an Activation: —; see text Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bind off-hand attack. Weight: — a soulmeld to a chakra, essentia pool. Using an infusion to power a spare hand Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, requires 10 minutes and the expenditure This faceted gemstone is the size of a coin and 10 days. of an infusion of the appropriate level. mounted on a golden disk covered in runes An infusion powers a spare hand for 24 and scrollwork. hours. SPARE HAND Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item. Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Soulstones are boons to all those who chanBody Slot: Waist Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, nel the power of incarnum (see Magic Caster Level: 11th 12 days. of Incarnum). When you use the proper Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation command thought, this gem adheres to Activation: — the center of your forehead (the same SPELLMIGHT BRACERS Weight: 5 lb. command thought causes the soulstone to Price (Item Level): 3,300 gp (8th) Body Slot: Arms disengage). While you wear a soulstone, you This strange item consists of an animated arm Caster Level: 5th can bind a soulmeld to your brow chakra, and three-fingered claw attached to a heavy Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation gaining the normal ability granted by leather belt reinforced with strips of metal. Activation: — such a bind. This effect functions despite Weight: 1 lb. the fact that you are currently wearing a As its most basic function, a spare hand magic item in that chakra. This bind is can grasp or carry any object you could These finely wrought, black steel bracers are in addition to any binds you are already normally carry in one hand, freeing your etched with the image of a wand and a staff allowed (though it doesn’t let you bind an normal hands for other tasks. A spare hand crossed. Magical runes surround both. extra soulmeld to your brow chakra). can hold magic items such as wands and If you are already able to bind soulrods for easy access, but you cannot actiSpellmight bracers grant you the ability to melds to your brow chakra, the soulstone vate those items while they are so held. sacrifice accuracy for damage when castinstead grants you 1 bonus essentia that Transferring an item to or from a spare ing your spells. When casting a spell that can be invested only in a soulmeld bound hand is a free action. requires a touch attack and that deals hit to your brow chakra. uninvested, and you gain an additional bonus on your attack roll and damage roll equal to the essentia that was invested. For example, if you were an 8thlevel soulborn with 2 essentia invested in your impulse boots, you could drain that soulmeld temporarily to gain an additional +2 bonus on the attack roll and damage roll of your smite attack. Essentia drained from a soulmeld in this way returns to your essentia pool and can be invested again as normal. Chakra Bind (Hands): If you bind soulsmite gauntlets to your hands chakra, you gain one additional daily use of your smite opposition ability. When the gauntlets are bound, the gems mounted on them glow with soft inner light. See Magic of Incarnum for rules on binding magic items to your chakras. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, essentia pool. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  137  620_10762_Chp3.indd 137  12/21/06 5:39:49 AM  Shadow maniple  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Strongarm bracers  Illus. by S. Ellis  Hexbands  point damage, you can take a –5 penalty on the attack roll to deal an extra 1d6 points of damage with the spell. A duskblade (PH2 19) can use these bracers when delivering a touch spell through a melee weapon, even if the spell doesn’t deal hit point damage. In this case, the weapon (rather than the spell) deals an extra 1d6 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, keen edge. Cost to Create: 1,650 gp, 132 XP, 4 days.  SPELLSIGHT SPECTACLES Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: — Weight: — These round-rimmed spectacles have bluetinted lenses and a clear gem set into the joint of each earpiece. Spellsight spectacles grant you a +5 competence bonus on Spellcraft checks made to decipher scrolls and Use Magic Device checks made to use scrolls. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, read magic. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  Vambraces of warding  SPELLSINK SCARAB Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — Exotic and arcane symbols circumscribe this scarab-shaped brooch. You can activate a spellsink scarab whenever you would take hit point damage from a spell or psionic power. A scarab has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges reduces the damage dealt to you by the spell or power (to a minimum of 0 points of damage). 1 charge: Reduce damage by 2d6 points. 2 charge: Reduce damage by 3d6 points. 3 charges: Reduce damage by 4d6 points.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater dispel magic. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  STEADFAST BOOTS Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These thick, heavy boots are reinforced with iron along the sole. Steadfast boots help keep you on your feet. You gain a +4 bonus on checks made to avoid being bull rushed, overrun, or tripped. Furthermore, as long as you carry a two-handed weapon, you are treated as if you had readied that weapon against any creature that charges you (and thus it deals double damage if your attack is success-  138  620_10762_Chp3.indd 138  12/21/06 5:39:52 AM  ful), even if the weapon can’t normally be set against a charge. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  STORM GAUNTLETS  These flexible, blue-green leather armbands are covered with gold studs. When wearing strongarm bracers, you can wield weapons as if you were one size category larger than normal. (You don’t take any penalty when using weapons as normal for your size.) For example,  CLOTHING  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 18,000 (14th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Surcoat of valor  SURCOAT OF VALOR Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This is a fine blue linen surcoat, with gold and white trim and a golden dragon rampant emblazoned on the chest. If you are a knight (PH2 24), a surcoat of valor grants you various benefits associated with your challenge ability. You can increase the save DC of your knight’s challenge by 1. If you also wear a magic item that provides a bonus on Will saves (or on all saves), the duration of your knight’s challenge increases by 1 round. Despite the described appearance, a surcoat automatically changes its colors and image to match your official symbol or heraldry.  A surge crystal allows you to exceed your normal manifesting limits briefly. A crystal has 5 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges increases your manifester level for the next psionic power you manifest in that round. The manifester level boost gives you the ability to augment the power to a higher degree than you otherwise could; however, you must still pay the extra power point cost for this augmentation. 1 charge: +1 manifester level. 3 charges: +2 manifester level. 5 charges: +3 manifester level. The benefit from a surge crystal doesn’t stack with wild surge or the Overchannel feat. A surge crystal can be activated only after being worn continuously for 24 hours. If it is taken off, it becomes inactive until it is again donned and worn for a full 24 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, wild surge (EPH 31) or Overchannel feat. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 648 XP, 18 days.  Illus. by W. England  STRONGARM BRACERS  SURGE CRYSTAL  This leather band holds an indigo crystal that pulses with a vibrant radiance.  Ribbons of electricity crackle over these gleaming, blue-tinged metal gauntlets. Jagged white bolts arc between the pair, filling the air with the scent of ozone. When worn together, this pair of +1 spiked gauntlets grants you resistance to electricity 5. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, storm gauntlets have 4 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges allows you to generate a number of electrcity-based effects. 1 charge: shocking grasp. 2 charges: lightning bolt (Reflex DC 14 half). 4 charges: electric spheres. These act like flaming spheres, except that you create four spheres of crackling electricity. You can direct any or all of the spheres with the same action. Multiple spheres directed at the same creature deal damage separately (Reflex DC 13 half). These spheres deal electric damage. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, shocking grasp, lightning bolt. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp (plus 604 gp for two masterwork gauntlets), 400 XP, 10 days.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s splendor. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 10,604 gp (13th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  a human wearing these bracers could wield Large or Medium weapons without penalty. The effect of these bracers doesn’t stack with the powerful build trait (such as that possessed by the half-giant and goliath races). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, enlarge person. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  SYMBOL OF TRANSFIGURATION Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This holy symbol is warm and radiates a sense of peace and security, as if an angel had been wearing it close to her heart. Many good-aligned religions have some especially well-wrought holy symbols that are actually symbols of transfiguration. Three times per day, a symbol of transfiguration allows you to produce a purify food and drink effect. Once per day, you  139  620_10762_Chp3.indd 139  12/21/06 5:39:58 AM  can use align weapon (good only) on any weapon you hold, though the duration is only 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, align weapon, purify food and drink. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  TABARD OF THE DISEMBODIED [RELIC]  Illus. by S. Ellis  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This misty gray tabard is silky soft to the touch. It is embroidered with small sequins in a skull motif. A tabard of the disembodied is connected to the Ethereal Plane, the realm where ghosts hold sway. Once per day, you can activate this tabard to become ethereal for 1 round, provided that you are neutral evil, lawful evil, chaotic evil, or neutral. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can activate a tabard of the disembodied to transport yourself to the Ethereal Plane (as the ethereal jaunt spell) for up to 10 rounds per day. This duration need not be continuous, and the effect is dismissable with another standard (mental) action. While you are on the Ethereal Plane, the spells you cast affect the Material Plane normally, unlike those of spellcasters who reach the Ethereal Plane by other means.  To use the relic power, you must worship Nerull and either sacrifice a 7th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 13 HD. Lore: The first of these tabards is said to have been among the burial raiments of Shedlazzar IV, a legendary wizardking who haunted his castle for decades after his death. His grandson, a noted necromancer in his own right, wrested the secret of the tabard’s creation from his ancestor’s ghost using an exceptionally cruel torture technique designed to psychically flay the spirit (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, ethereal jaunt. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  TABARD OF THE GREAT CRUSADE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: — and move (manipulation); see text Weight: 1 lb. This silvery tabard is emblazoned with a stylized sunburst design. Because of its association with uncommon valor and amazing healing power, a tabard of the great crusade is a welcome sight at any scene of armed conflict. When you wear one of these garments over armor, you and every ally within 20 feet gains a +1 morale bonus on saving throws, provided that you are lawful neutral, lawful good, lawful evil, or neutral. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a tabard of the great crusade also provides you with damage reduction 5/evil. Furthermore, any ally other than you who grasps the hem of the tabard (a move [manipulation] action) can gain the benefit of a heal spell. This ability functions once per day. To use the relic power, you must worship St. Cuthbert and either sacrifice an 8th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 15 HD. Lore: Only seven of these tabards are known to exist. Originally made for an elite cadre of warrior-healers, they have since been passed down from one battlefield cleric to another (Knowledge [religion] DC 20).  Tabard of the great crusade  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, heal. Cost to Create: 2,750 gp, 220 XP, 6 days.  THIRD EYE This small hemispherical crystal has a wide, flat facet on one side and a multifaceted dome shape on the other. It sparkles with an inner gleam. When you issue the proper command thought (a standard action) to a third eye, it adheres to the center of your forehead (the same command causes the item to disengage). Some third eyes function continuously when worn, while others require activation.  Third Eye Aware Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: — This crystal glows with a pale, faint blue light. This crystal continually grants you a +10 competence bonus on Spot checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Spot 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Tabard of the disembodied  140  620_10762_Chp3.indd 140  12/21/06 5:40:01 AM  Third Eye Clarity Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This crystal is so clear that it is difficult to see.  Glowing with a faint magenta light, this crystal draws your eyes into its limitless depths.  Emitting a white glow, this crystal seems to shed light into the deepest shadows.  This crystal grants you a +10 competence bonus on Concentration checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Concentration 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  This crystal grants you a +5 competence bonus on Sense Motive checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sense Motive 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  Third Eye Conceal Price (Item Level): 120,000 gp (21st) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) enchantment Activation: — Weight: — A bright white light shines from the heart of this crystal, seeming to offer the promise of protection. A third eye conceal protects you from view by all devices, spells, or powers that detect, influence, or read emotions or thoughts, as well as those with mind-affecting or scrying descriptors. It even foils bend reality, limited wish, miracle, reality revision, and wish when they are used to affect your mind or to gain information about you (however, metafaculty can pierce the protective quality). In the case of arcane eye, remote viewing, or a scrying spell used to scan an area you are in, the effect works but you simply aren’t detected. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mind blank or psionic mind blank (EPH 119). Cost to Create: 60,000 gp, 4,800 XP, 120 days.  Third Eye Concentrate Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This matte black crystal seems to absorb any ambient light, rather than reflect or refract it. You can activate a third eye dampening to reduce all variable numeric effects of the next power, psi-like ability, spell, or spell-like ability that affects you to the minimum value (if this power or spell would affect multiple creatures, only you are protected). This protection lasts until the end of your next turn. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dispel magic or damp power (CP 82) Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  Third Eye Dominate Price (Item Level): 120,000 gp (21st) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) enchantment Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: — This yellow, gleaming crystal pulses with hypnotic power. A third eye dominate allows you to use dominate monster (as the spell) once per day on any creature within 60 feet (Will DC 23 negates). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dominate monster or psionic dominate (EPH 96). Cost to Create: 60,000 gp, 4,800 XP, 120 days.  Third Eye Expose Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 2,600 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  CLOTHING  You can activate this crystal to negate any one of the following conditions affecting you: confused, dazed, fascinated, or stunned. You can activate the eye in response to an effect that would impose one of these conditions (for instance, after failing your save against a monk’s Stunning Fist attack but before the stun takes effect). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, panacea (SC 152). Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  Third Eye Freedom  CHAPTER 3  Third Eye Dampening  This crystal flickers rapidly through a range of reddish hues. You can activate a third eye freedom to trigger a freedom of movement effect lasting for 1 round. Since this ability suppresses only the effect hindering your movement, you must either find some other method of removing or eliminating the effect, or it will resume after the duration ends. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of movement. Cost to Create: 1,300 gp, 104 XP, 3 days.  Third Eye Gather Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: — This crystal beams with a deep blue light. This crystal grants you a +10 competence bonus on Gather Information checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Gather Information 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Third Eye Improvisation Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — This crystal flickers from one color to the next in the blink of an eye. You can activate this crystal to gain a +5 competence bonus on a single skill check for a skill in which you have no ranks. You  141  620_10762_Chp3.indd 141  12/21/06 5:40:06 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  are treated as being trained in the skill for the purpose of making this check. You must begin the check before the end of your turn to gain this benefit, and the check must be completed within 10 minutes. You can’t take 20 on this check (though you can take 10). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, guidance. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  Third Eye Penetrate Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) no school Activation: — Weight: —  Illus. by B. Hagan  This crystal glows with a piercing sapphire light. A third eye penetrate grants you a +2 bonus on caster level checks to overcome a creature’s spell resistance. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, limited wish or bend reality (EPH 80). Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  Third Eye Powerthieve  A third eye powerthieve allows you to borrow one power from a psionic target within 40 feet once per day. If the target fails a DC 16 Will save, it instantly loses one power of your choice, and you instantly gain temporary knowledge of that power. You can manifest the borrowed power normally if you have sufficient power points to pay its cost. You retain knowledge of the power for up to 70 minutes, at which time you lose knowledge of the power and the former owner regains it, regardless of distance. If the former owner is dead, you still lose the borrowed power. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dominate person or thieving mindlink (EPH 121). Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  Third Eye Repudiate Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This crystal emits a powerful azure light. A third eye repudiate allows you to use dispel magic (as the spell) once per day.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dispel magic or dispel psionics (EPH 94). Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Third Eye Sense Price (Item Level): 24,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: — This bright orange crystal emits a steady inner glow. At will, you can activate this crystal to see and hear a distant location. Line of sight or line of effect is not necessary, but the locale must be a place familiar to you or an obvious one, such as behind a door, around a corner, or in a grove of trees. Once the locale has been selected, the focus of your sight does not move, but can be rotated in all directions to view the area as desired. Psionically, magically, or supernaturally enhanced senses cannot be used through this item. If the chosen locale is shrouded in magical or psionic darkness, you see nothing. If it is naturally pitch black, you can see in a 10-foot radius around the  Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: — This clear crystal features a faintly glowing emerald-green heart.  Vanguard treads  Third eye True strike gauntlets  142  620_10762_Chp3.indd 142  12/21/06 5:40:07 AM  center of the effect or out to the extent of your darkvision. This effect does not work across planes. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, scrying or clairvoyant sense (EPH 83). Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  Vampire torc  Third Eye Surge CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 2,100 gp (6th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — A pulsing green glow shines from this crystal.  TORC OF DISPLACEMENT Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) illusion Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: — This glass torc is partially silvered. From some angles it is perfectly transparent; from others it reflects like a mirror. A torc of displacement allows you to temporarily shift your image slightly away from your current location. A torc has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you concealment for 1 round. The effectiveness of this concealment (the miss chance provided) varies depending on the number of charges spent. 1 charge: 20% miss chance. 2 charges: 30% miss chance. 3 charges: 40% miss chance. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, displacement. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Torc of the titans  Torc of power preservation  TORC OF HEROIC SACRIFICE Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) enchantment Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: — This jet-black torc is crafted in the form of two clasped hands. A torc of heroic sacrifice allows you to take an injury meant for your ally. When you activate this torc, you take all the damage dealt to a single ally by a single attack or effect that has just occurred. The damage dealt to you has no type, and therefore ignores any energy resistance, damage reduction, or immunities you might have. The ally must be within 30 feet, and you must have line of sight to that ally. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater heroism. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  TORC OF POWER PRESERVATION Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) no school Activation: — Weight: —  This copper neck band is inlaid with gold, silver, and platinum. The inlays take the form of a dragon writhing across the surface of the torc. Five times per day, you can manifest a power by paying power points equal to the standard cost minus 1 (minimum 1). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, limited wish or bend reality (EPH 80). Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by A. Stokes  A third eye surge has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges grants you an insight bonus on Strength checks, Dexterity checks, Strength- and Dexterity-based skill checks, and weapon damage rolls for 1 round. 1 charge: +2 insight bonus. 2 charges: +3 insight bonus. 3 charges: +4 insight bonus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true strike or adrenaline boost (CP 78). Cost to Create: 1,050 gp, 84 XP, 3 days.  TORC OF THE TITANS Price (Item Level): 3,300 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. Dramatic, but simple, images of clouds and lightning blots cover this thick, golden neck ring. When you activate a torc of the titans, you gain a +5 morale bonus on Strength checks, Strength-based skill checks, and melee weapon damage rolls for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength. Cost to Create: 1,650 gp, 132 XP, 4 days.  143  620_10762_Chp3.indd 143  12/21/06 5:40:12 AM  TOXIC GLOVES Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  These smooth black leather gloves feel slightly sticky to the touch.  CLOTHING  Toxic gloves allow you to imbue a held weapon with poison without any risk to yourself. When you activate these gloves, choose a single melee weapon you hold. The next attack made with that weapon before the end of your turn also poisons the target (injury; 1d6 Con/1d6 Con; Fort DC 16 negates). This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, poison. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  Illus. by E. Cox  TRANSPOSER CLOAK Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This cloak is divided diagonally into two colors. The upper portion is pure white, while the lower is black as night. A transposer cloak allows you to switch positions with another creature. When you activate this cloak, you and any one creature within 30 feet swap positions. Both you and the target must occupy the same size of space on the battlefield (for instance, a human could swap places with a dwarf or a goblin, but not with an ogre or a cat). If the other creature is unwilling to trade positions, it is allowed a DC 13 Will save to negate the effect. Each creature can bring along objects weighing up to its maximum load, but additional creatures can’t be brought along. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, baleful transposition (SC 23). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  144  620_10762_Chp3.indd 144  TRUE STRIKE GAUNTLETS Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) divination Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — These supple leather gauntlets are dyed the color of ivory. When you activate true strike gauntlets, you gain a +20 insight bonus on the next attack you make before the end of your next turn. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true strike. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  TUNIC OF STEADY SPELLCASTING Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This earth-colored tunic is sturdy, though the material is as soft as silk. Around the neck, wrists, and hem are runes of stability stitched in gold thread. You gain a +5 competence bonus on Concentration checks. Despite the name, the tunic’s bonus applies on all Concentra-  tion checks, not just those made to cast spells. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bear’s endurance. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  UNICORN PENDANT Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. A marble unicorn’s head with a horn of gold has been sculpted onto the face of this pendant. A unicorn pendant has two abilities, each of which can be activated once per day: cure moderate wounds (2d8+10 points of damage) and neutralize poison. In addition, if you are a paladin wearing a unicorn pendant, you treat your Charisma as 4 points higher than normal for the purpose of your lay on hands ability. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure moderate wounds, neutralize poison. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  VAMBRACES OF WARDING Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These golden bracers are engraved with holy sigils. Vambraces of warding fit snugly over the arms of any creature that dons them. A good-aligned wearer gains a +2 sacred bonus to AC against ranged attacks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, protection from arrows. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  VAMPIRE TORC Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — Tunic of steady spellcasting  12/21/06 5:40:17 AM  This black iron torc bears a ruby that seems to weep tears of blood.  These massive boots have spiked, treaded soles and look large enough to fit a heavily armored ogre. A row of inset amethysts runs around the top cuff. Vanguard treads provide you with superior traction and stability, which provides the following effects: • You can move through difficult terrain (such as rubble, undergrowth, steep slopes, stairs, or snow) at normal speed and without suffering any other impairment. • You are unaffected by slippery ice, wet stones, or other surfaces where traction is a problem. • You gain a +8 bonus on attempts to resist bull rushes and a +4 bonus on grapple checks to resist a grapple attempt if that grapple would move you into another square. Areas that have been magically manipulated to impede movement (such as by an entangle spell) still affect you, as do water, quicksand, and other nonsolid surfaces. You still have to slow down for narrow paths requiring Balance checks and for surfaces steep enough to require Climb checks. If the terrain deals damage (such as the burning ground on the Elemental Plane of Fire), you still take that damage.  Unicorn pendant  The massive spikes and treads on the soles of vanguard treads leave a distinctive trail. Anyone following you gains a +10 circumstance bonus on Survival and Search checks made to track you. Lore: Ancient giants made the first vanguard treads to aid their scouts in navigating difficult terrain and hazards (Knowledge [arcana] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spider climb. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  VANISHER CLOAK Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) illusion Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This silk cloak is seamless—a single sheet of gossamer, gray fabric. A vanisher cloak allows you and nearby allies to briefly disappear from sight. A cloak has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges turns you (and perhaps one or more allies) invisible, as the invisibility spell, for 1 or more rounds. 1 charge: You become invisible for 4 rounds. 2 charges: You and one adjacent ally become invisible for 3 rounds. 3 charges: You and up to three adjacent allies become invisible for 2 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, invisibility. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  A veil of allure increases the save DC of your enchantment spells or spell-like abilities, as well as the Charisma-based save DCs of your extraordinary or supernatural abilities, by 2. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s splendor. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days.  VEST OF THE ARCHMAGI Price (Item Level): 200,000 gp (25th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) no school Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 2 lb. This gold-brocaded, burgundy garment seems fit to be worn by the gods themselves.  Illus. by B. Trott  Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb.  Dyed in swirls of pink and purple, this semitransparent veil looks like the garb of a sultan’s harem dancer.  CLOTHING  VANGUARD TREADS  Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: —  CHAPTER 3  A vampire torc allows you to heal your own wounds when you deal damage to an enemy. When you activate this torc, the next successful melee attack you make before the end of your turn also heals you of an amount of damage equal to half the damage your attack dealt. This ability functions equally well regardless of your creature type. If you don’t deal damage with a melee attack before the end of your turn, that activation of the torc is wasted. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, vampiric touch. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  VEIL OF ALLURE  The vest of the archmagi is legendary. It fills the dreams of every apprentice sent to clean the inkpots and dust the tomes, but rumors of this item are unfounded. Whispering in the bunkrooms of the Academy at night, after the oil lamps are quenched and curfew has long passed, eager apprentices claim that a vest of the archmagi provides its wearer with continuous defensive bonuses equivalent to the most potent bracers of armor (+8 armor bonus to AC) and cloak of resistance (+5 resistance bonus on saving throws). It is also said that the vest provides its wearer with the continuous ability to overcome the magical defenses of her enemies (+2 enhancement bonus on caster level checks made to overcome spell resistance), and that it allows him to recall up to three arcane spells that he had previously prepared and cast (as a pearl of power, except that it can be used for any spell up to 9th level and activating it requires only a swift action). Finally, it is suggested, the wearer of the vest of the archmagi could expend a prepared arcane spell or spell slot to heal himself of damage equal to five times the  145  620_10762_Chp3.indd 145  12/21/06 5:40:20 AM  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  level of the spell so expended. This act requires but a moment’s thought (a swift action), and can be repeated as often as desired throughout the day. Sadly, these stories obviously have no basis in reality, for such an item would undoubtedly be prized above all others by any mage with the resources to craft one. Of course, as a thing of myth, the vest of the archmagi can’t be created. But if it could, it might possibly have the following prerequisites and costs. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, wish. Cost to Create: 100,000 gp, 8,000 XP, 200 days.  VEST OF THE MASTER EVOKER Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 2 lb. This black silk vest is heavy with moonstone and jacinth beadwork sewn into arcane patterns on the back.  VEST OF DEFENSE  Illus. by W. England & E. Cox  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. This snug-fitting vest is crafted from the skin of a huge tan-and-black snake. A vest of defense improves your ability to dodge attacks. When activated, this vest improves the dodge bonus to AC granted by fighting defensively, the total defense action, or the Combat Expertise feat by 2. Using more than one of these techniques doesn’t provide more than a +2 bonus. This bonus lasts for 1 round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  Vest of defense  Vestments of ebonsilk  Vest of resistance  Crackling with power, a vest of the master evoker intensifies arcane evocation spells you cast. Many an ambitious evoker sees gaining this vest as a rite of passage, much like casting his first magic missile or fireball, and among elite warmages (CAr 10) it serves as an unparalleled status symbol. Three times per day, you can activate the vest to enhance the next arcane evocation spell you cast before the end of your turn. That spell deals additional damage equal to twice its spell level, and the save DC of the spell increases by 2. This damage is of the same type as normal for the spell (or, if the spell deals more than one type of damage, of any one of those types at your discretion). If the spell doesn’t normally deal damage, this use of the vest has no effect. In addition, you can apply the effect of any sudden metamagic feat (CAr 83) you know to any evocation spell you cast from a wand or staff as if you were casting the spell yourself. Doing this requires no activation, but uses up that feat’s daily use as normal.  Vest of the archmagi  146  620_10762_Chp3.indd 146  12/21/06 5:40:22 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Spell Focus (evocation) or evoker, able to cast at least five evocation spells, two of which must be 5th level or higher. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  VEST OF RESISTANCE  VESTMENTS OF EBONSILK [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These lightweight black robes are covered in a silvery spiderweb tracery. The clasp at the neck is a silver brooch shaped like a spider with amethyst eyes. Thus far, the only known vestments of ebonsilk have been found in the possession of drow clerics. If you are chaotic evil, neutral evil, or chaotic neutral, wearing these vestments grants you a +2 resistance bonus on saving throws. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, the vestments also grant you a continual spider climb effect. To use the relic power, you must worship Lolth and either sacrifice a 4th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 7 HD. If you sacrifice a 7th-level spell slot or have at least 13 HD and the True Believer feat, you also gain a continual freedom of movement effect.  WAND BRACELET Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: See text Weight: — This golden chain bracelet has a number of small metal objects hanging from it like charms. A wand bracelet can store up to four items, which appear as charms along the bracelet. You can grab one of the charms from the bracelet as a swift (manipulation) action, causing it to appear in your hand. If you have an item in hand, you can use a move (manipulation) action to store the item in the bracelet or to switch a held item for a stored item by touching the item to the charm representing the stored item. Storing an item causes it to shrink down and appear as a charm hanging from the bracelet. Any item stored can weigh no more than 3 pounds and must be able to be held in one hand, such as a wand or a light weapon. Only the wearer of the bracelet is able to retrieve or store items. Lore: The name wand bracelet describes the most common use of this item. Originally designed to hold small keepsakes as charms, and crafted to be appropriate for formal gatherings, wand bracelets have found popularity among artificers (ECS 29) who favor spell trigger devices (Knowledge [history] DC 15). These bracelets are also sometimes known as assassins’ charms, because small weapons can easily be concealed within them (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shrink item. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  Wand bracelet  WAR WIZARD CLOAK Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. This long black cloak has a high collar and is cut to overlap a wearer’s chest and arms. An open white palm in a circle adorns the right breast, and a rampant purple dragon rages on the left.  Illus. by B. Trott  A vest of resistance offers magical protection in the form of a +1 to +5 resistance bonus on saving throws. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, resistance. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day (+1); 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days (+2); 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days (+3); 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days (+4); 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days (+5).  CLOTHING  This elegantly styled white leather vest is edged in silver piping and has silver buttons.  CHAPTER 3  Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) (+1); 4,000 (8th) (+2); 9,000 (12th) (+3); 16,000 (14th) (+4); 25,000 (15th) (+5) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Lore: Said to be woven from silk extruded by Lolth herself, vestments of ebonsilk are occasionally awarded to undeserving followers of Lolth as a test to see how quickly her favored clerics can appropriate them (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, freedom of movement, spider climb. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  A war wizard cloak protects you from the elements (as endure elements) and also activates a feather fall effect on you automatically if you fall more than 5 feet. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this cloak has four other abilities, each of which can be activated once per day: dimension door, mage armor, protection from arrows, and sending Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door, endure elements, feather fall, mage armor, protection from arrows, sending. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  WATCH LAMP Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 1st Aura: Faint; (DC 15) evocation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This plain mithral headband has no distinguishing features.  147  620_10762_Chp3.indd 147  12/21/06 5:40:28 AM  This white cloak looks like it was woven by a gigantic arachnid. A large gray spider is embroidered upon the back amid radiating patterns of webbing.  CLOTHING  CHAPTER 3  You gain a +2 bonus on saves against poison. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, this cloak has two other abilities, each of which can be activated once per day: spider climb and hold person. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, hold person, resistance, spider climb. Cost to Create: 2,100 gp, 168 XP, 5 days.  WINK BROOCH Price (Item Level): 600 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) enchantment Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: —  Illus. by W. England  The ruby set at the head of this straight pin twinkles like the eye of a gnome with a secret.  Transposer cloak  White cloak of the spider  When activated, a watch lamp creates a globe of light that hovers at your shoulder and sheds light as a torch. The light follows you wherever you move. It can be extinguished with a second command. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dancing lights. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  WATER CLOAK Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: — and immediate (command) Weight: 1 lb. This sailcloth cloak’s elaborate embroidery evokes the waves of the sea. Within the pattern of the waves, a repeating swirl of thread matches the symbol writhing within the large, dark crystal shard that forms the clasp at the neck of the cloak. The cloak appears damp, and the lower edge looks as though it has been soaked in water.  148  Despite its damp appearance, a water cloak always feels completely dry to its wearer, even in pouring rain. This cloak grants you a +5 bonus on Reflex saves against any effect that deals fire damage and allows you to avoid fire damage as if you  620_10762_Chp3.indd 148  Water cloak  had evasion. Whenever you make a successful Reflex saving throw against any fire effect that deals half damage on a successful save, you instead take no damage. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, a water cloak offers two other activated abilities. Extinguish: The cloak extinguishes all nonmagical fires within 30 feet. This ability has no effect on fire creatures. It functions five times per day. Counterfire: The cloak can counter any spell with the fire descriptor (as if you were casting dispel magic). This ability functions once per day. Attempting to counter a spell that doesn’t have the fire descriptor wastes the effect. Prerequisites: Bind Elemental (ECS 51) or Craft Wondrous Item, planar binding. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  WHITE CLOAK OF THE SPIDER Price (Item Level): 4,200 gp (9th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Many a diplomat wears a wink brooch to court to gain an edge in conversation. When activated, this brooch grants you a +2 competence bonus on a single Bluff or Diplomacy check attempted before the end of your turn. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, charm person. Cost to Create: 300 gp, 24 XP, 1 day.  WYRMFANG AMULET Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This necklace consists of a leather thong strung with dragon’s teeth. All attacks you make with natural weapons or unarmed strikes while wearing this amulet overcome damage reduction as through they were magic weapons. (The attacks don’t gain an enhancement bonus, just the ability to overcome some creatures’ damage reduction.) Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater magic fang. Cost to Create: 675 gp, 54 XP, 2 days.  12/21/06 5:40:31 AM  Illus. by D. Kovacs  s any veteran of adventure would tell you, sometimes right time. Though these tools are not as ubiquitous as the even your best weapon isn’t enough to see you through armor or magic amulet you wear every day, or the weapon you swing every round, experienced adventurers recogthe dangers lurking in dank swamps and dark dunnize that a tool needn’t be useful in every encounter for it geons. Any successful hero can undoubtedly point to be worth bringing along. Whether to the times when he reached as mundanely functional as a bag of into his backpack and pulled “Fiendish acid-spitting zombie or as explosively exciting as a out the perfect tool for the unbelievable dragons? No problem—I have just holding strand of lightning, the magic items in situation at hand. this category are an important part The following pages include over 300 the thing for that.” such magic items: wondrous devices —Lidda of your arsenal. meant to give you an edge at just the  TOOL DESCRIPTIONS  The items in this chapter are arranged alphabetically.  ABERRANT SPHERE Price (Item Level): 2,800 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Full-round (command) Weight: 1 lb. The surface of this sphere seems to constantly flash with words in your native tongue, but you can’t make out what they say.  620_10762_Chp4.indd 149  Created by alienists (CAr 21) and other cultists who worship aberrant entities, an aberrant sphere allows its wielder to summon creatures from beyond space and time at the cost of a fraction of his own sanity. A sphere has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges causes the sphere to shatter, as it summons a particular kind of aberration, which appears anywhere within 30 feet of you and serves you (as summon monster I) for 7 rounds. You also take a penalty on your Will saves as long as the creature is present. 1 charge: Summons a choker; –1 penalty on Will saves. 2 charges: Summons a grick; –2 penalty on Will saves.  3 charges: Summons a carrion crawler; –3 penalty on Will saves. At the end of the duration (or when the creature is destroyed), the sphere re-forms in your hand (or at your feet if your hands are full) and the penalty on your Will saves disappears. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, summon monster IV. Cost to Create: 1,400 gp, 112 XP.  149  12/21/06 5:45:33 AM  ANSTRUTH HARP  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 32,100 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 14th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) conjuration, enchantment, transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. This teakwood lap harp is slender and graceful, its strings made of silver wire. An engraved design depicting waves and fog graces the wood. This masterwork harp grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 12 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of three spell effects (control water, mass cure light wounds, or mind fog), each once per day. If you pick up an Anstruth harp but do not have 12 or more ranks in Perform (string instruments), the instrument bestows one negative level on you, which persists for as long as you hold it. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the instrument is held. Lore: A wise and powerful bard named Falataer reportedly created the first of these instruments, which he used to test and reward the students at all seven levels of his bardic college. Others have since copied the designs but honored Falataer by keeping the name Anstruth harp (Knowledge [arcana] or bardic knowledge DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, control water, mass cure light wounds, mind fog, bard. Cost to Create: 16,000 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork harp), 1,280 XP, 32 days.  ARCANE THIEVES’ TOOLS Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This set of picks, pins, and levers is housed in a supple leather bag decorated with arcane runes.  This set of masterwork thieves’ tools is the perfect accessory if you depend on a blend of magic and skill to achieve your thieving goals. In addition to granting the normal +2 circumstance bonus on Disable Device and Open Lock checks, these tools can grant a character with the trapfinding class feature a special benefit. When activating the tools, you can expend an arcane spell or arcane spell slot of 1st level or higher to gain a +5 competence bonus on either a Disable Device check or an Open Lock check begun before the end of that turn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, knock, trapfinding. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  AROMA OF CURDLED DEATH Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — This elegant, stoppered glass bottle holds a dark, viscous fluid. One round after you apply this elixir to your skin, it creates an invisible cloud of gas in a 10-foot radius that moves with you and persists for 1 minute. You are immune to the cloud’s effects, but every other creature in the area that has 3 Hit Dice or fewer immediately dies (no save). A creature that has 4–6 Hit Dice must succeed on a DC 17 Fortitude save each round it remains in the area or die. A creature that has 7 Hit Dice or more takes 1d4 points of Constitution damage (Fort DC 17 half) per round of exposure. If you open the bottle but do not immediately apply the liquid, the cloud of gas spreads to fill a 5-foot-radius area, centered on the opened bottle or the place where the liquid was poured out. This cloud persists for 1 minute. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cloudkill, Craft (alchemy) 4 ranks. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  AROMA OF DREAMS Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: —  This cut crystal bottle is filled with silvery liquid. The bottle’s stopper is a single piece of smoky quartz. One round after you apply this elixir to your skin, it creates an invisible cloud of gas in a 10-foot radius that moves with you and persists for 5 rounds. You are immune to the cloud’s effects, but each round at the end of your turn every other creature in the area with 10 Hit Dice or fewer must make a successful DC 14 Fortitude save or fall asleep for 1 minute. Furthermore, each creature remaining in the area 1 round later (whether already asleep or not) must make a second successful DC 14 Fortitude save or fall asleep for 1 hour. Creatures with more than 10 Hit Dice are immune to the effect. If you open the bottle but do not immediately apply the liquid, the cloud of gas spreads to fill a 5-foot-radius area, centered on the opened bottle or the place where the liquid was poured out. This cloud persists for 1 minute. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, deep slumber, Craft (alchemy) 4 ranks. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  BAG OF BOULDERS Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb. This worn doeskin pouch holds a few unremarkable pebbles. This pouch creates tiny pebbles that strike with the force of a catapult stone when thrown. Each stone has a range increment of 50 feet. You are proficient with the stones and must make a successful ranged attack to strike with one. A stone disappears after it completes its flight. Activating a bag of boulders is a standard action that includes both drawing and throwing a stone. Each bag of boulders has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges when you draw a pebble from the bag determines the damage dealt by the stone when thrown. 1 charge: Deals 2d6 points of bludgeoning damage. 2 charges: Deals 3d6 points of bludgeoning damage. 3 charges: Deals 4d6 points of bludgeoning damage.  150  620_10762_Chp4.indd 150  12/21/06 5:45:36 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, shrink item. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  BAG OF ENDLESS CALTROPS  Banner of the storm’s eye  Five times per day, you can reach into this pouch and pull out a handful of caltrops (enough to cover a 5-foot square). In addition to the activation cost, filling a 5-foot square with caltrops by hand requires a standard action. The caltrops produced are not magical and follow all the rules for normal caltrops (PH 126). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Leomund’s secret chest. Cost to Create: 400 gp, 32 XP, 1 day.  BATTLE BRIDLE  A stampede of horses is depicted charging across this surprisingly light leather saddle.  This red burlap sack feels warm to the touch. A bag of flames contains a tiny ember of pure elemental fire. The bag has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges when you place your hand into the bag allows you to draw forth fire to create a particular effect. 1 charge: Flame burns in your hand, as the produce flame spell, with a duration of 1 minute. Your melee touch attack deals 1d6+5 points of fire damage, or you can hurl the flame up to 120 feet as a ranged touch attack that deals 1d6+5 points of fire damage (and ends the duration). 2 charges: You hurl the flame up to 30 feet away, whereupon it immediately turns into a Small fire elemental. The elemental is under your control (as if summoned by summon nature’s ally II) and remains for 5 rounds.  BANNER OF THE STORM’S EYE Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) or shoulders Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) enchantment Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. (12 lb. if backpack frame worn) This banner is a rectangular military standard depicting a white, two-tailed swirl—like a stylized overhead view of a hurricane—on a dark green background. The banner’s fluttering movements seem slower than they should be. An unfurled banner of the storm’s eye always waves more slowly than nearby flags, and it seems unaffected by the wind or by the movement of its bearer. As long as it is held aloft, the banner automatically suppresses (but does not dispel) fear effects on all creatures within 20 feet. It also prevents any creature  Illus. by S. Ellis  Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Face; see text Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  BAG OF FLAMES Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: —  TOOLS  This nondescript brown leather pouch is secured with a piece of twisted wire that has several sharp points.  within 20 feet from becoming confused or stunned. Alternatively, you can mount the banner on a backpack frame to leave your hands free. The backpack frame costs 5 gp and weighs 10 pounds. While so mounted, the banner occupies your shoulders body slot. Lore: The swirling pattern on this banner was common to elite military units in the last great war (Knowledge [history] DC 15). Such banners provided protection from psychological tricks employed by creatures such as mind flayers (Knowledge [history] DC 25). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, calm emotions. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 800 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Move (manipulation) Weight: 2 lb.  3 charges: Faint wisps of flame spread up your arm and cover your body. This sheath provides immunity to fire for 1 hour or until it has negated 60 points of fire damage. As a standard action, you can touch an adjacent creature to grant it any remaining immunity to fire you have from this effect (you lose the remaining immunity). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, produce flame, protection from energy, summon nature’s ally II. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  A battle bridle occupies a mount’s face body slot. While you are mounted upon a creature that is wearing a battle bridle, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Ride checks and the benefit of the Mounted Combat feat. If you already have Mounted Combat, you instead gain the benefit of Ride-By Attack. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Mounted Combat, Ride-By Attack, calm animals. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  BEETLE ELIXIR Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Full-round (manipulation) Weight: — The viscous liquid in this vial has an oily brown color and smells a little like wet leaves. Drinking beetle elixir causes your skin to harden, darken, and gloss over, and short antennae to sprout from your forehead.  151  620_10762_Chp4.indd 151  12/21/06 5:45:38 AM  You gain darkvision out to 60 feet and a +2 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) These effects last for 12 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, alter self, darkvision, Craft (alchemy) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 675 gp, 54 XP, 2 days.  CHAPTER 4  BLAST DISK  TOOLS  Price (Item Level): 900 gp (4th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by S. Ellis  This jet-black, 8-inch-diameter plate bears a bas relief humanoid skull surrounded by runes and sigils. Its other side is perfectly smooth and flat. A blast disk can be set to explode through proximity or on a timer. In either case, when the disk activates it explodes, destroying the blast disk and dealing 5d6 points of fire damage to all creatures and objects within 10 feet (Reflex DC 14 half). If set to explode through proximity, a blast disk must be set down in a square on the battlefield. The next creature of Small or larger size to enter that square (either on the ground or airborne within 5 feet) sets off the blast disk. That Bag of boulders  Daylight pellets  creature receives a –2 penalty on the save against the blast. A blast disk can also be set to automatically explode up to 10 rounds after placement. A character who has trapfinding can find (Search DC 28) and disable (Disable Device DC 28) a blast disk. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fireball. Cost to Create: 450 gp, 36 XP, 1 day.  BLAST GLOBES Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Standard (command); see text Weight: 1 lb. Dozens of smaller glass spheres comprise this fist-sized orb. The flicker of a small flame seems to reflect from deep within. When you activate a set of blast globes, the transparent globes separate and begin circling each other. One round after they activate, you can direct the globes to strike (as a group) any location within 400 feet as a free action. The globes then move to  Bag of ﬂames  that location and create an explosion in a 20-foot-radius spread. Any creature in the area takes 10d6 points of fire damage and 2d6 points of sonic damage, is deafened for 2d6 rounds, and is pushed 1d6 squares away from the center of the blast. A successful DC 15 Reflex save halves the fire damage and negates the push, while a successful DC 15 Fortitude save negates the deafening effect. After exploding, the globes reform in your hands or at your feet (if your hands are full). This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fireball, shout. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  BLESSED BANDAGE Price (Item Level): 10 gp (1/2) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — A single, softly glowing thread runs along one side of this linen bandage. Applying a blessed bandage immediately stabilizes the recipient (but heals no damage).  Mirror of suggestion  Camouﬂage paint Thorn pouch  152  620_10762_Chp4.indd 152  12/21/06 5:45:40 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure minor wounds. Cost to Create: 5 gp, 1 XP, 1 day.  BLIGHT STONE  CAMOUFLAGE PAINT Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1/2 lb.  CANAITH MANDOLIN Price (Item Level): 8,100 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration, conjuration Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. This ornate, eight-stringed mandolin is carved of ebony and decorated with mother-of-pearl inlays depicting fantastic monsters. This masterwork mandolin grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 8 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of three spell effects (cure serious wounds, dispel magic, or summon monster III), each once per day.  This jar contains a colorful, jellylike substance. As a standard action, the user of camouflage paint can spread a glob of the substance across her face. Once applied, camouflage paint changes the color of the user’s skin, clothing, and gear to that of her surroundings. This effect provides a +5 circumstance bonus on Hide checks, but only when the user is stationary. An application of camouflage paint lasts for 2 hours. Each 3-inch-diameter, 2-inch-deep jar of camouflage paint has enough material for five applications. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, disguise self. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  Censer of the last breath  620_10762_Chp4.indd 153  CENSER OF THE LAST BREATH [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) conjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb. This censer is a perforated iron ball hung from a jeweled chain. The holy symbol of Nerull is inscribed on a boss at its center. Nerull’s faithful fill the censer of the last breath with ground gems rather than incense. When you burn 10 gp worth of quartz dust in it, the censer produces an obscuring mist effect, which, if you are neutral evil, neutral, lawful evil, or chaotic evil, you can see through as if it weren’t there. Filling the censer is a standard action. Once it has been filled, it automatically starts burning the quartz dust, creating a cloud in a 20-footradius emanation centered on you. For the duration of the effect, the cloud moves with you as long as you hold the censer. The quartz dust burns in the censer for 10 rounds, after which the cloud dissipates. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can burn other kinds of gem dust in the censer to produce additional effects, as detailed on the table below. In each case, the cloud produced is the same size as the one produced by the quartz dust and behaves in the same way, except as noted on the table. You are always unaffected by the cloud created.  Illus. by C. Critchlow & W. England  A blight stone creates an instantaneous burst of vapor that damages plants and plant-based creatures. The stone must be thrown (range increment 10 feet) or hurled from a sling (using that weapon’s normal range increment) as a ranged touch attack. When the stone strikes its target or a hard surface, it deals no damage but explodes in a 10-foot-radius burst of noxious vapors. This cloud of gas deals 5d6 points of damage to all plants and plant creatures in the area (Fort DC 14 half). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, blight. Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day.  Blight stone  TOOLS  This stone is tacky with a putrid green residue.  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held); see text Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Standard (thrown) or — (ammunition) Weight: 1 lb.  If you pick up a Canaith mandolin but do not have 8 or more ranks in Perform (string instruments), the instrument bestows one negative level on you, which persists for as long as you hold it. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the instrument is held. Lore: See Anstruth harp (page 150). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure serious wounds, dispel magic, summon monster III, bard. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork mandolin), 320 XP, 8 days.  153  12/21/06 5:45:46 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Censer of the Last Breath Spell Level/ Hit Dice Gem Type 5th/9 Diamond dust  Value 250 gp  6th/11  Emerald dust  500 gp  7th/13  Sapphire dust  1,000 gp  8th/15  Ruby dust  2,000 gp  To use the relic power, you must worship Nerull and either sacrifice a divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and a minimum number of Hit Dice. The spell level and Hit Dice required are given for each entry in the table. Lore: An ancient high priest of Nerull forged the first censer of the last breath over a fire fueled by the entire hoard of an old red dragon. Thereafter, he used it to send the souls of countless helpless prisoners to their just reward (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, acid fog, cloudkill, incendiary cloud, obscuring mist, solid fog. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  CHIME OF HARMONIC AGONY Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. This constantly vibrating silver chime is inscribed with bizarre, alien musical notes.  COGNIZANCE CRYSTAL Effect Solid fog (as the spell, except that only living creatures are slowed) Cloudkill (as the spell, except that it hovers near you [Fort DC 17 partial]) Acid fog (as the spell, except that only living creatures are slowed) Incendiary cloud (as the spell, except that it hovers near you [Reflex DC 22 half])  CLI LYRE Price (Item Level): 18,100 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. This elegant lyre is carved from jade and strung with gold wire. Rubies adorn its frame. This masterwork lyre grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 10 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of three spell effects (break enchantment, dimension door, or shout), each once per day. If you pick up a Cli lyre but do not have 10 or more ranks in Perform (string instruments), the instrument bestows one negative level on you, which persists for as long as you hold it. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the instrument is held. Lore: See Anstruth harp (page 150). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, break enchantment, dimension door, shout, bard. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork lyre), 720 XP, 18 days.  A chime of harmonic agony allows you to channel musical power through your own body to wreak harm on your enemies. When you activate the chime, you must spend one daily use of your bardic music ability and target a creature within 30 Cognizance Crystals feet. The chime deals sonic damage equal Max Power to 3d6 + your Charisma modifier (Fort Point DC 16 half). Storage CL Aura (DC) If you also wear a magic item that grants 1 1st Faint (15) an enhancement bonus to your Constitu3 3rd Faint (16) tion score, you can add the item’s bonus to 5 5th Faint (17) the damage dealt by the chime. 7 7th Moderate (18) A chime of harmonic agony functions 9 9th Moderate (19) three times per day. 11 11th Moderate (20) Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, 13 13th Strong (21) 15 15th Strong (22) shout. 17 17th Strong (23) Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  Price (Item Level): See text Body Slot: — Caster Level: See table Aura: See table; (DC varies) evocation Activation: Free (mental) Weight: 1 lb. Silver wire gently encloses and binds a large core crystal and several smaller crystals in a geometric design. The aquamarine crystals emit a faint glow. A cognizance crystal stores power points, which the holder can use to manifest a psionic power she knows (instead of spending points from her own power pool). You cannot directly replenish your personal power points from those stored in a cognizance crystal, nor can you draw power points from more than one source to manifest a power (even if that second source is your own power pool). A cognizance crystal can store only as many power points as its original maximum, set at the time of its creation. When a crystal’s power points are used up, the glow of the crystal dims. A user can recharge it by paying power points on a 1-for-1 basis (a standard [mental] action). While doing this depletes the user’s own power point reserve for the day, those power points remain available in the crystal until used. Before you can use a cognizance crystal, you must hold or have it on your person for at least 10 continuous minutes. A typical cognizance crystal has AC 7, 10 hit points, hardness 8, and a break DC of 16. Prerequisites: Craft Cognizance Crystal (EPH 44). Cost to Create: See table.  Market Price 1,000 gp (4th) 4,000 gp (8th) 9,000 gp (12th) 16,000 gp (14th) 25,000 gp (15th) 36,000 gp (17th) 49,000 gp (18th) 64,000 gp (18th) 81,000 gp (20th)  Cost to Create 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days 18,000 gp, 1,440 XP, 36 days 24,500 gp, 1,960 XP, 49 days 32,000 gp, 2,560 XP, 64 days 40,500 gp, 3,240 XP, 81 days  154  620_10762_Chp4.indd 154  12/21/06 5:45:50 AM  CONDUIT ROD Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 3 lb.  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) and standard (manipulation) Weight: 8 lb. This conical basket is woven from the bark of various deciduous trees. Attached to it with a bit of dried grapevine is a clay medallion bearing the holy symbol of Yondalla. Cornucopias of the needful were created to provide Yondalla’s most intrepid followers with aid for their journeys. For as long as you possess the cornucopia, you can withdraw one fruit from it every morning (roll d% each morning to determine the kind of fruit obtained), provided that you are  lawful good, neutral good, or lawful neutral. When consumed by such a character (a standard action), this fruit has an effect based on its type, as given in the table.  TOOLS  CORNUCOPIA OF THE NEEDFUL [RELIC]  Fruit Effect Apple You are healed (as the heal spell) Grape cluster If split into twelve portions, each portion functions as a heroes’ feast spell for the individual who consumes it (only functions for LG, NG, or LN characters) 31–45 Tangerine This fruit produces a break enchantment effect on you 46–60 Strawberry You gain spell resistance 25 for 5 rounds 61–74 Cherry You gain the benefit of a death ward spell for 12 minutes 75–89 Peach You gain the benefit of a divine power spell for 10 rounds 90–100 Lemon You gain the benefit of a neutralize poison spell (self only) for 2 hours  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, break enchantment, death ward, divine power, heal, heroes’ feast, neutralize poison, spell resistance. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  CRYSTAL ANCHOR OF ALERTNESS Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1/2 lb. This lightweight shaft of transparent crystal is 4 feet long and tapers to a point on both ends.  Cornucopia of the needful  Each fruit disappears after 24 hours if not eaten. The following morning, the cornucopia again yields one fruit. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a cornucopia of the needful contains 1d4+1 fruits each morning (roll d% and consult the table for each) rather than only one. As before, the cornucopia once again yields 1d4+1 fruits the following morning, regardless of how many were withdrawn and consumed. To use the relic power, you must worship Yondalla and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD. Lore: Yondalla wove these conical baskets herself, then gave them to her favored high priests to distribute to the followers who needed them most (Knowledge [religion] DC 20).  When planted in the ground and activated, a crystal anchor of alertness burns with clear light (providing illumination as a lantern). In addition, your allies gain a +5 bonus on Listen and Spot checks as long as they remain within 30 feet of the anchor. This effect lasts for 1 hour, and the anchor functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, alarm or zone of alertness (CP 104). Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  Illus. by R. Spencer  Conduit rods alter the fundamental ways in which magical energies interact. When you activate a conduit rod and specify an energy type (acid, cold, electricity, fire, or sonic), your existing resistance to energy of the chosen type increases by 20. This protection also extends to every creature adjacent to you (though the value is based on the value of the energy resistance of those creatures rather than your own) and lasts for 1 round. The rod has no effect on creatures that are immune to the chosen energy type or have no resistance to it at all. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, antimagic field. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  d% 01–15 16–30  CHAPTER 4  Each end of this slender ebony rod is set with a clear, jagged crystal. A wild energy seems to flicker in the depths of these stones, and gazing intently into one reveals minute flares of fire, tiny sparks of electricity, and other glimpses of suppressed energy.  Cornucopia of the Needful  DAERN’S INSTANT TENT Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. This strip of canvas, folded into a small triangle, bears a single black sigil on one side.  155  620_10762_Chp4.indd 155  12/21/06 5:45:52 AM  Upon drinking a domain draught, you gain access to its domain for 24 hours. You can use the domain’s granted power, and if you normally prepare domain spells, you can add those from the draught’s domain to your choices until the effect expires. If you drink a second domain draught before using the first one, the effect of the first one is lost. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, access to the associated domain. Cost to Create: 1,650 gp, 132 XP, 4 days.  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  When activated, Daern’s instant tent grows to become a 20-footsquare tent. The inside of the tent is always temperate in climate, as the Leomund’s tiny hut spell. Cots inside can sleep up to eight Medium creatures. The tent also features a fire pit with a smoke hole. The tent has resistance to electricity 10, fire 10, and acid 10, as well as immunity to cold. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Leomund’s tiny hut. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  DOSS LUTE  Illus. by W. England  DAYLIGHT PELLET Price (Item Level): 150 gp (1st) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 4,100 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration, enchantment, illusion Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb.  Within a thick black pouch, you see a handful of tiny ceramic beads. Thin veins of light shine through cracks in each bead.  This graceful lute is carved of alder and inlaid with abstract designs in copper. Domain draughts  A daylight pellet can be thrown up to 50 feet; when it lands, it shatters and creates illumination equivalent to a daylight spell, but with a duration of 10 rounds. These small stones are usually found in pouches containing 3d4 pellets. Using a pellet destroys it. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, daylight. Cost to Create: 75 gp, 6 XP, 1 day.  DIAMONDSKIN DECANTER Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb. This glittering pitcher is wrought of platinum worked into the shape of dragon scales. When tipped, a diamondskin decanter pours out a thin, silver oil shot through with flickering motes of light. A diamondskin decanter can pour forth up to 3 draughts, which are renewed each day at dawn. Pouring 1 or more draughts onto yourself or an adjacent creature grants it damage reduction.  1 draught: Damage reduction 2/adamantine, which lasts for 1 hour until 20 points of damage have been prevented. 2 draughts: Damage reduction 3/adamantine, which lasts for 1 hour or until 30 points of damage have been prevented. 3 draughts: Damage reduction 4/adamantine, which lasts for 1 hour or until 40 points of damage have been prevented. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  DOMAIN DRAUGHT Price (Item Level): 3,300 gp (8th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — This jewel-toned liquid comes in a small, translucent vial inscribed with religious iconography. A domain draught is the distilled essence of a cleric domain. A successful DC 15 Knowledge (religion) check identifies the specific domain with which a given draught is associated from the markings on the bottle.  This masterwork lute grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 6 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of three spell effects (delay poison, hold person, or mirror image), each once per day. If you pick up a Doss lute but do not have 6 or more ranks in Perform (string instruments), the instrument bestows one negative level on you, which persists for as long as you hold it. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way (including restoration spells) while the instrument is held. Lore: See Anstruth harp (page 150). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, delay poison, hold person, mirror image, bard. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork lute), 160 XP, 4 days.  DOVE’S HARP Price (Item Level): 12,100 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. A flight of sculpted porcelain doves adorns this elegant harp.  156  620_10762_Chp4.indd 156  12/21/06 5:45:55 AM  When you play this masterwork harp Dragon’s Draughts Color Breath Weapon while using your bardic music ability, all Brass 60-foot line, 6d6 fire (DC 23) allies within 60 feet gain fast healing 3 White 30-foot cone, 6d6 cold (DC 23) for 1 minute. Black 80-foot line, 12d4 acid (DC 24) Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mass Copper 80-foot line, 12d4 acid (DC 24) cure light wounds. Bronze 100-foot line, 12d6 electricity (DC 25) Cost to Create: 6,000 gp (plus 100 gp for Green 50-foot cone, 12d6 acid (DC 25) masterwork harp), 480 XP, 12 days.  DRAGON’S DRAUGHT  DRAGONDOOM SCEPTER Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 3 lb. Carved chromatic and metallic dragon scales descend like leaves down the length of this regal scepter. A dragondoom scepter aids spellcasters in defeating dragons. When you hold this scepter, you gain a +2 competence bonus  Illus. by R. Gallegos  When a dragon or a creature that has the dragonblood subtype (see Races of the Dragon or Dragon Magic) consumes a dragon’s draught, it gains the ability to use a particular type of breath weapon once during the next hour as a standard action. If you drink a second dragon’s draught before using the first, the effect of the first is lost.  Dragon’s draughts come in ten different varieties, one for each kind of true dragon. See the table for the size, shape, damage, Reflex save DC (for half damage), and market price of each dragon’s draught. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dragon type or dragonblood subtype. Cost to Create: 600 gp, 48 XP, 2 days (brass or white); 1,200 gp, 96 XP, 3 days (black or copper); 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days (bronze or green); 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days (blue or silver); 2,750 gp, 220 XP, 6 days (gold or red).  TOOLS  A single dragon’s tooth servers as the stopper for this oversized flask. The liquid within bubbles turbulently with barely contained energy.  100-foot line, 12d8 electricity (DC 25) 50-foot cone, 12d8 cold (DC 25) 50-foot cone, 12d10 fire (DC 26) 50-foot cone, 12d10 fire (DC 26)  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): See text Body Slot: — Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: —  Blue Silver Gold Red  Price (Item Level) 1,200 gp (4th) 1,200 gp (4th) 2,400 gp (7th) 2,400 gp (7th) 3,500 gp (8th) 3,500 gp (8th) 4,500 gp (9th) 4,500 gp (9th) 5,500 gp (10th) 5,500 gp (10th)  Drums of marching Chime of harmonic agony  Doss lute Ollamh harp  620_10762_Chp4.indd 157  Horn of plenty  157  12/21/06 5:45:58 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  on caster level checks made to overcome the spell resistance of dragons. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, when you activate a dragondoom scepter, the next spell of 6th level or lower you cast before the end of your turn deals an extra 50% damage to any creature with the dragon type. Spells that don’t deal damage are unaffected. This ability can be activated three times per day, but not in consecutive rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Empower Spell. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 720 XP, 18 days.  DRUMS OF MARCHING Price (Item Level): 1,100 gp (4th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: See text Weight: 5 lb.  Illus. by W. England  Each of these two drums bears a line of runes engraved around its base. This pair of drums includes a harness that allows them to be strapped to a humanoid creature. A character who plays drums of marching during overland movement and succeeds on a DC 15 Perform (percussion instruments) check grants allies within 120 feet a +4 bonus on the Constitution check to avoid nonlethal damage from a forced march (PH 164). Using the drums doesn’t adversely affect a performer’s speed. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, longstrider. Cost to Create: 500 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork drums), 40 XP, 1 day.  DUST OF DISPERSION Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration, illusion Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: —  Creatures within the cloud make ranged attacks normally. The cloud persists for 3 minutes, but a moderate wind (11+ mph) disperses it in 4 rounds. A strong wind (21+ mph) disperses the cloud in 1 round, and any spell that deals fire damage burns away any part of the cloud in its area. Dust of dispersion cannot be used underwater. Once activated, this dust is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, blur, glitterdust. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  EHLONNA’S SEED POUCH [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation and thrown); see text Weight: 4 lb. This brown fur pouch is secured with a leather thong threaded through a large brass buckle. When first opened, this pouch holds three ordinary-looking acorns. If you are neutral good, lawful good, chaotic good, or neutral, these acorns function as goodberries. Each morning, the pouch once again holds three acorns, no matter how many were in it before. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can create one of the following effects (your choice) to occur whenever you fling an acorn from the pouch. An acorn can be thrown up to 100 feet. • A treant emerges from the acorn into any space in which it will physically fit. This effect otherwise functions like the changestaff spell, lasting for 1 hour. • A wall of thorns (as the spell) springs up from the ground where the acorn lands.  You can fling this powder into the air up to 10 feet away from yourself to create a translucent cloud that occupies a 10-foot cube. Creatures outside the cloud can see into it and through it (though their sight is slightly blurred), but any ranged attack entering or passing through the cloud has a 50% miss chance.  620_10762_Chp4.indd 158  To use the relic power, you must worship Ehlonna and either sacrifice an 8th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 15 HD. Lore: Legend holds that Ehlonna created the first of these pouches and used it to seed the world’s great forests with oaks and treants. Since then, she has occasionally given a pouch to one of her favored clergy in recognition of service (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, changestaff, fire seeds, goodberry. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  ELECTRIC EEL ELIXIR Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — This vial contains blue liquid with sparkling yellow motes dancing within it. Imbibing electric eel elixir turns your skin silvery and grants you a +1 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) Furthermore, one time while the elixir is in effect, you can make a melee touch attack that deals 1d8+1 points of electricity damage. You gain a +3 circumstance bonus on the attack roll if the target is wearing metal armor. The elixir’s effect lasts for 12 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, alter self, shocking grasp, Craft (alchemy) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day.  ELIXIR OF ADAMANTINE BLOOD  This fine powder sparkles like ground gems.  158  • The acorn functions as a splash weapon that deals 11d6 points of fire damage upon impact. This effect otherwise functions like the fire seeds spell, except that the damage isn’t split up among multiple acorns.  Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb.  Ehlonna’s seed pouch  12/21/06 5:46:04 AM  This heavy vial appears to be filled with solid black metal, but when upended, the blackness flows slowly downward.  The viscous liquid inside this cut glass bottle is red-orange and roils like the heart of an inferno. When you drink this elixir, your hands immediately burst into flame, allowing you to deal an extra 1d6 points of fire damage with each of your unarmed attacks. These flames do not harm you. This effect lasts for 3 minutes. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, burning hands. Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day.  ENVELOPING PIT [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 3,600 gp (8th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  Enveloping pit  A favorite kobold tactic is to lie in wait until foes are standing close to a concealed enveloping pit, then give the command word to open it. Any creature that suddenly finds an enveloping pit beneath it falls in. A successful DC 22 Reflex save allows the creature to move to an adjacent safe square, if one exists. To use the relic power, you must worship Kurtulmak and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Centuries ago, Kurtulmak gave his high priests a half-dozen of these portable pit traps to aid them in acquiring new lands and wealth (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, plane shift. Cost to Create: 1,800 gp, 144 XP, 4 days.  This flat black square looks like a piece of silken Eternal Wand Spell Caster cloth, folded many times upon itself. Fleeting Level Level images of creatures and objects flit across the 0 1st surface of the fabric. Kobolds are among the finest trapmakers in the world, but this portable pit trap  1st 2nd 3rd  1st 3rd 5th  The facets of this small, translucent white crystal gleam with faint light. When activated, an essentia jewel adds 1 point of essentia to your essentia pool for a single round. This essentia can be invested as normal. Only one essentia jewel can be used in each round, and each can be used only once, after which it crumbles to dust. You need not hold an essentia jewel to activate it, but you must keep it somewhere on your body (in a pouch or a backpack, for example). Lore: Essentia jewels are mined from enormous crystalline structures on the Positive Energy Plane (Knowledge [the planes] DC 15). These crystalline structures are actually fonts of unborn souls. Pure soul energy flows like water through these areas, imbuing the surrounding structures with echoes of incarnum (Knowledge [the planes] DC 25). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, soul boon (MoI 104). Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day.  Illus. by B. Hagan  Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: —  Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Free (command) Weight: —  TOOLS  ELIXIR OF FLAMING FISTS  ESSENTIA JEWEL  CHAPTER 4  An elixir of adamantine blood causes a reaction that hardens your flesh. You gain 10 temporary hit points, which last for up to 1 hour. These temporary hit points do not stack with any other effects that grant temporary hit points. If you wear adamantine armor when you drink this elixir, you instead gain 20 temporary hit points (though if you remove the armor before the duration elapses, you lose 10 of the temporary hit points immediately). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stoneskin. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  exceeds even their expertise. If you are lawful evil, lawful neutral, or neutral evil, an enveloping pit functions like a portable hole, except that it is 50 feet deep. An enveloping pit covers a 10-foot square when opened fully, but the opening can be as small as 1 foot in diameter if it is laid upon the ground while still folded. The pit opens fully only if it has enough flat space to do so; it stops opening when an edge hits a wall or an obstruction of similar size. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can open or close an enveloping pit with a command word from anywhere within 60 feet.  ETERNAL WAND Price (Item Level): See table Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: See table Aura: Faint; (see table) school of spell contained in eternal wand Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This long, tapered wand ends with a pink crystal containing red swirls. An eternal wand holds a single arcane spell of 3rd level or lower, determined during creation. Any character who can cast arcane spells can activate the wand to use the spell contained in it, regard-  Price Spellcraft (Item Level) DC 460 gp (3rd) 15 820 gp (4th) 15 4,420 gp (9th) 16 10,900 gp (13th) 17  Cost to Create 230 gp, 18 XP, 1 day 410 gp, 32 XP, 1 day 2,210 gp, 176 XP, 3 days 5,450 gp, 436 XP, 11 days  159  620_10762_Chp4.indd 159  12/21/06 5:46:07 AM  Illus. by E. Widermann  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  less of whether the spell appears on his class spell list. An eternal wand functions two times per day. Lore: During the final years of the last great war, the artificers and wizards of a powerful noble family perfected a new form of wand built around a crystal shard (Knowledge [history] DC 10). The development of the eternal wand allowed lesser arcanists to take the place of war wizards during the final days of the last great war, supplementing their passive spells with more aggressive magic (Knowledge [history] DC 15). While the artificers have been searching for ways to streamline the process of creation, the technique is still in its infancy. Currently, the wands are rarely seen except in military units, but a few soldiers who served in the war brought their eternal wands of magic missile home from the front lines (Knowledge [history] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wand, Craft Wondrous Item, the spell contained in the eternal wand. Cost to Create: See table.  EVERFULL MUG Price (Item Level): 200 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This common-looking brown clay mug has persistent stains just under the rim. Three times per day, when you recite the command word, this mug fills with 12 ounces of water, cheap ale, or watery wine (your choice). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create water. Cost to Create: 100 gp, 8 XP, 1 day.  EVERLASTING FEEDBAG Price (Item Level): 800 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This leather feedbag is adorned with a small medallion bearing an embossed cornucopia symbol.  160  620_10762_Chp4.indd 160  When you place an everlasting feedbag around the muzzle of a horse, donkey, or other equine animal, suitable feed fi lls the bag and is continuously replenished until it is removed from the animal. Any uneaten feed disappears at that time. An everlasting feedbag can be used once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create food and water. Cost to Create: 400 gp, 32 XP, 1 day.  EVERLASTING RATIONS Price (Item Level): 350 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This nondescript, small leather pouch has a light blue silk drawstring. This pouch contains enough trail rations to feed a Medium creature for one day. Every morning at sunrise, the pouch magically creates another day’s worth of rations. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create food and water. Cost to Create: 175 gp, 14 XP, 1 day.  EXPLODING SPIKE Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1/2 lb.  remove it from the ground (a standard action) to render it harmless and ready for reuse. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fireball. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  FIELD PROVISIONS BOX Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. This well-crafted wooden box is carved with runes denoting abundance. When activated, a field provisions box produces a full day’s sustenance (food and water) for up to fi fteen humans or five horses. A field provisions box functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create food and water. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 40 XP, 2 days.  FLESHEATER Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. This brown scepter is topped with a device that looks like a tooth-filled mouth.  This plain, iron spike feels warm to the touch and pulses with stored energy. An exploding spike becomes invisible 1 round after you plant it fi rmly in the ground. Thereafter, as soon as any creature comes within 10 feet of it, the spike explodes in a fireball that deals 10d6 points of fire damage (Reflex DC 14 half) to every creature within 20 feet of it. This blast destroys the spike. During the round that an exploding spike remains visible after being planted, any creature can safely Gear for you and your mount: Riding boots and an everlasting feedbag  12/21/06 5:46:09 AM  Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation, transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. This three-stringed bandore is carved of striated maple and set with tiger’s-eye stones.  GLITTER STONE Price (Item Level): 450 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held); see text Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: Standard (thrown) or — (ammunition) Weight: — Sparkles of light glitter on this stone’s surface. A glitter stone renders hidden creatures visible. The stone must be thrown (range increment 10 feet) or hurled from a sling (using that weapon’s normal range increment) as a ranged touch attack. When the stone strikes its target or a hard surface, it deals no damage, but explodes in a 10foot-radius burst of glittering shards. All  GLOBE OF SUNLIGHT Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) evocation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb. This golden, fist-sized orb is set with faceted rubies and yellow topazes. You can hurl a globe of sunlight up to 50 feet. When it arrives at the end of its trajectory, it detonates as a sunburst spell (Reflex DC 22 partial), except that the radius of the burst is only 40 feet. Once activated, the globe is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, sunburst. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  GLYPH SEAL Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — This multicolored, thumb-sized opal is carved with a variety of arcane symbols. A glyph seal allows you to convert any arcane or divine spell of up to 2nd level into a symbol similar to a glyph of warding. To do so, you must cast the spell while  GLYPH SEAL, GREATER Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation This opal glows with multihued light, and ornate arcane symbols have been etched into its surface. A greater glyph seal functions like a glyph seal, with the following exceptions: It can be keyed with any spell of 5th level or higher, it functions as the greater glyph of warding spell, detecting and disabling it requires a successful DC 33 check, and a successful DC 33 Search check is needed to find it. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater glyph of warding. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by D. Martin  This masterwork bandore grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 2 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of four spell-like abilities (flare, light, mending, or message), each once per day. Lore: See Anstruth harp. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, flare, light, mending, message, bard. Cost to Create: 675 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork bandore), 54 XP, 2 days.  invisible creatures in the area become coated in glittery dust, making them visible for 3 rounds. Any coated creature takes a –40 penalty on Hide checks for the duration of the effect. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, glitterdust. Cost to Create: 225 gp, 18 XP, 1 day.  TOOLS  FOCHLUCAN BANDORE  Hammersphere  holding the seal; doing this is called keying the seal. You can safely transport a keyed glyph seal until you activate it by pressing the seal to the desired surface. The seal can adhere to any nonmagical, nonliving object. An activated glyph seal functions as the spell glyph function of a glyph of warding and can be detected and disabled as a magic trap (DC 30). A glyph seal is unaffected by the spell within it. Once activated, the now-empty glyph seal can be retrieved (though it requires a successful DC 30 Search check to find) and used. You can always remove any glyph seal you keyed and activated to redeploy it elsewhere. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, glyph of warding. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  CHAPTER 4  When you activate a flesheater, you summon forth horrible, hungry apparitions of green energy resembling minuscule imps or quasits. These apparitions surround a living creature you designate within 30 feet. That creature must succeed on a DC 18 Fortitude save or take 3d6 points of damage each round for the next 4 rounds. A flesheater functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, summon monster III. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  HAMMERSPHERE Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. This sphere is 4 inches in diameter, made of silver, and covered in small rubies. The hammer-and-anvil symbol of Moradin is etched onto its surface in four places. Once per day, when held aloft and activated, this sphere conjures forth a giant hammer. This hammer functions as a spiritual weapon except that it deals 3d6 points of damage on a successful hit. You do not have to concentrate on the hammer or keep the sphere aloft while it attacks.  161  620_10762_Chp4.indd 161  12/21/06 5:46:12 AM  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, greater magic weapon, spiritual weapon. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  HARROW ROD Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. This slightly twisted metal rod is black as pitch. When activated, a harrow rod sprays forth a 30-foot cone that deals 9d6 points of acid damage to all within the area (Reflex DC 17 half). A harrow rod functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, Melf’s acid arrow. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days.  HEALING SALVE Price (Item Level): 2,250 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb. This jar contains a greasy, yellow, jellylike substance. A single application of healing salve smeared across a wound heals 1d8+1 points of damage. A double application heals 2d8+3 points of damage. A triple application heals 3d8+5 points of damage. No matter how much salve is used, each application takes a standard action to apply. A 3-inch-diameter, 2-inch-deep jar holds enough salve for ten single applications. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure serious wounds. Cost to Create: 1,175 gp, 90 XP, 3 days.  HORN OF PLENTY Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 2 lb.  This short, slightly curved horn looks like a cornucopia and bears engravings of various foods. Once per day, you can blow a horn of plenty to create a heroes’ feast, as the spell, for twelve participants. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, heroes’ feast. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  ICY STRAND OF THE NORTH Price (Item Level): 2,500 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb. Several jagged shards of ice are frozen onto this white cord. These ice crystals are still cold and show no evidence of melting. You can detach and throw one of the ice crystals on this cord as a standard action. Each crystal can be thrown up to 80 feet. When it reaches the end of its trajectory, it explodes to create an ice storm or sleet storm (as the spells) centered on its endpoint. Each of two opaque crystals creates a sleet storm effect, while each of four transparent crystals creates an ice storm. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ice storm, sleet storm. Cost to Create: 1,250 gp, 100 XP, 3 days.  INCENSE OF CONCENTRATION Price (Item Level): 250 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — This golden yellow block of incense is imprinted with a rune representing memory. If burned while you prepare spells, this incense allows you to prepare one extra 1st-level spell for the day. You can benefit from only one exposure to incense of concentration in a 24-hour period. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Rary’s mnemonic enhancer. Cost to Create: 125 gp, 10 XP, 1 day.  INFINITE SCROLLCASE Price (Item Level): 2,800 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Move (manipulation); see text Weight: 3 lb. This elaborate mahogany tube has a slit that runs along its length. A wooden dowel, capped on the ends with gold, fits against the slit, locking into place with jeweled clasps. An infinite scrollcase holds up to fifty scrolls or other parchments, which can be placed within it or removed as with any normal scrollcase. When you activate an infinite scrollcase, the desired scroll unfurls through the slit, ready to read or cast from. When you cast a spell from a scroll unfurled from an infinite scrollcase, you gain a +4 competence bonus on Concentration checks made to cast that spell defensively. If you have at least a +1 base attack bonus, you can retrieve a scroll from an infinite scrollcase as part of a move action, similar to drawing a weapon. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Leomund’s secret chest. Cost to Create: 1,400 gp, 112 XP, 3 days.  JUMPING CALTROPS Price (Item Level): 250 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 2 lb. This leather bag periodically twitches and jerks, as though it holds something alive. Jumping caltrops function just like normal ones, except that each round at the start of your turn, if no targets are in their square, they move 5 feet toward the nearest enemy (chosen randomly if more than one is equidistant). Upon entering an occupied square, the jumping caltrops “attack” that creature as normal for caltrops. They remain capable of movement for 5 rounds after being activated, then function like normal caltrops until dawn the next day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, animate objects. Cost to Create: 125 gp, 10 XP, 1 day.  162  620_10762_Chp4.indd 162  12/21/06 5:46:15 AM  LENS OF THE DESERT Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: —  LIFE RING  Price (Item Level): 2,100 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration, enchantment Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb.  MAGIC BEDROLL Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration, enchantment Activation: Full-round (manipulation); see text Weight: 6 lb. Illus. by E. Deschamps  Price (Item Level): 400 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 5 lb.  MAC-FUIRMIDH CITHERN  This masterwork cithern grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 4 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of three spell effects (cure light wounds, mage armor, and sleep), each once per day. Lore: See Anstruth harp. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure light wounds, mage armor, sleep, bard. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork cithern), 80 XP, 2 days.  TOOLS  When you activate a lens of the desert, it creates a beam of focused sunlight that is the equivalent of a sunbeam spell. A lens of the desert functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, sunbeam. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  To activate a life ring, you break the twine crossing the hoop. Once active, a life ring grants a feather fall effect to the next four creatures who touch it within 10 rounds. The duration of each subject’s feather fall benefit is equal to the number of rounds remaining in the item’s duration when that creature touches the life ring. At the end of this duration, the broken life ring becomes inert and useless. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Extend Spell, feather fall. Cost to Create: 200 gp, 16 XP, 1 day.  This pear-shaped cithern is crafted of rosewood and decorated with mother-of-pearl inlays in an abstract, scalloped pattern.  CHAPTER 4  A gold frame worked with a sunburst motif and an elegant wooden handle decorate this flawless magnifying glass.  This 3-foot-diameter, 4-inch-thick wooden hoop has four equally spaced handholds where the wood flattens slightly. A piece of thin twine crosses the middle of the ring.  Artiﬁcer items: Cannith goggles, inﬁnite scrollcase, spare hand  163  620_10762_Chp4.indd 163  12/21/06 5:46:16 AM  This woolen sleeping bag is embroidered with stars and moons in silver and blue thread, and it smells of lavender.  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  A magic bedroll grants you a comfortable and peaceful night’s sleep. As long as you lie in it, you gain the benefit of an endure elements spell. After sleeping for 8 hours in the bedroll, you recover 1 hit point per character level, in addition to the hit points you recover normally. Getting into or out of a magic bedroll is a full-round action. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cure light wounds, endure elements. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  edge (geography) and Survival checks if you are neutral good, lawful good, chaotic good, or neutral. Relic Power: Once per day, if you have established the proper divine connection, you can command a map of unseen lands to spend 2 minutes redrawing itself. Doing so causes it to map the terrain within a  MAGIC SIPHON  Illus. by J. Thomas  Price (Item Level): 25,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. This short burgundy scepter has a spiral design running along its length and an open, clawlike sculpture at each end. A magic siphon drains the magical energy from existing spell effects, rendering them powerless and ineffective in the same manner that dispel magic would. Every creature adjacent to you when you activate a magic siphon is affected as though by a targeted greater dispel magic spell. This rod functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, greater dispel magic. Cost to Create: 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days.  MAP OF UNSEEN LANDS [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 5,200 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — This rolled-up sheet of vellum is generally kept in a dark-colored scroll tube decorated with wagon wheel motifs. A map of unseen lands is a boon to caravans of halfling pilgrims, who use it to avoid danger and make their way through the wilderness. While holding the map, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Knowl-  Map of unseen lands  10-mile radius with total accuracy but only middling detail. This ability doesn’t function underground. When the redraw command is issued, the DM should spend no more than 2 minutes of real time sketching out a map, adding items from the following list in the given order of priority. • General terrain features (mountains, rivers, and so forth), labeled if their names are widely known. • Structures encompassing more than 5,000 square feet (castles, temples, and ruins), named either specifically (“Fortress of the Undying”) or generally (“bardic college”). • Structures important for travel (bridges, dungeon entrances, and magic portals), labeled only if they are unusual in some respect. • Lairs of creatures of CR 12 or higher, labeled by creature type only. To use the relic power, you must worship Yondalla and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: The first map of unseen lands was sketched out by Fharlanghn as a gift for Yondalla. Since then, she has occasion-  ally given one to a large tribe of halflings intending to strike out for new territory (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, discern location. Cost to Create: 2,700 gp, 208 XP, 6 days.  MEMENTO MAGICA Price (Item Level): See table Body Slot: — Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — Carved into the shape of a dragon’s scale, this piece of amethyst swirls with foggy images of runes. When activated, a memento magica allows you to regain any one spell slot that you have previously used this day. The spell slot is available just as if the spell had not been cast. A memento magica recalls a spell slot of the level it was created to hold. Different mementos magica exist for each level from 1st through 9th. A memento magica functions once per day. This item has no effect for spellcasters who prepare their spells. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous item, ability to spontaneously cast spells of the spell level to be regained. Cost to Create: See table.  METAMAGIC RODS A metamagic rod holds the essence of a metamagic feat but does not change the spell slot of the altered spell. The metamagic rods presented here function in all respects as those described on page 236 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. Lesser and Greater Metamagic Rods: Normal metamagic rods can be used with spells of 6th level or lower. Lesser rods can be used with spells of 3rd level or lower, while greater rods can be used with spells of 9th level or lower.  Memento Magica Spell Slot Regained 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th  Price (Item Level) 1,500 gp (5th) 6,000 gp (10th) 13,500 gp (14th) 24,000 gp (15th) 37,500 gp (17th) 54,000 gp (18th) 73,500 gp (19th) 96,000 gp (20th) 121,500 gp (22nd)  Cost to Create 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days 6,750 gp, 540 XP, 14 days 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days 18,750 gp, 1,500 XP 38 days 27,000 gp, 2,160 XP, 54 days 36,750 gp, 2,940 XP, 74 days 48,000 gp, 3,840 XP, 96 days 60,750 gp, 4,860 XP, 122 days  164  620_10762_Chp4.indd 164  12/21/06 5:46:23 AM  Metamagic rod (reach)  Metamagic Rod (Chaining) Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) (lesser); 54,000 gp (18th) (normal); 121,500 gp (22nd) (greater) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) no school Activation: — Weight: 3 lb.  Metamagic Rod (Reach)  This thick iron rod has a handle wrapped in worn leather, and a small golden icon of an outstretched hand at its tip. You can cast up to three spells per day as though their ranges were affected by the Reach Spell feat. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, Reach Spell (CD 84). Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days (lesser); 16,250 gp, 1,300 XP, 33 days (normal); 36,500 gp, 2,920 XP, 73 days (greater)  Metamagic Rod (Sculpting) Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) (lesser); 11,000 gp (13th) (normal); 24,500 gp (15th) (greater) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) no school Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. The haft of this elegant rod is sculpted of silvery metal in graceful curves. At its top glitters a faceted sapphire.  You can cast up to three spells per day whose areas are modified as though affected by the Sculpt Spell feat. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, Sculpt Spell (CAr 83). Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days (lesser); 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days (normal); 12,250 gp, 980 XP, 25 days (greater).  Metamagic Rod (Substitution) Price (Item Level): 2,700 gp (7th) (lesser); 10,500 gp (13th) (normal); 24,300 gp (15th) (greater) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) no school Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. This fragile-looking glass rod is filled with elemental energy—flickering flames, crackling electricity, churning green acid, or frosty rime, depending upon its type. Four different versions of this rod exist, each keyed to a different type of energy (acid, cold, electricity, or fire). Three times per day, you can cast a spell as though using the appropriate Energy Substitution feat. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, Energy Substitution (CAr 79) for the appropriate energy type. Cost to Create: 1,350 gp, 108 XP, 3 days (lesser); 5,250 gp, 420 XP, 11 days (normal); 12,150 gp, 972 XP, 25 days (greater).  MIRROR OF SUGGESTION Price (Item Level): 3,600 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb.  The tarnished pewter back and handle of this small hand mirror are engraved with complex swirling patterns. When activated, a mirror of suggestion must be held in such a way as to force a creature within 30 feet to see its own reflection. This functions as a gaze attack; any creature that fails a DC 14 Will save is subject to a suggestion made by the mirror’s wielder. A mirror of suggestion functions two times per day, and each activation of the mirror can affect only a single creature. The mirror’s wielder is immune to its effect. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, suggestion or psionic suggestion (EPH 133). Cost to Create: 1,800 gp, 144 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by D. Martin  Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) (lesser); 32,500 (16th) (normal); 73,000 (19th) (greater) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Metamagic rod (chaining)  TOOLS  You can cast up to three spells per day that are chained as though affected by the Chain Spell feat. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, Chain Spell (CAr 76). Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days (lesser); 27,000 gp, 2,160 XP, 54 days (normal); 60,750 gp, 4,860 XP, 122 days (greater).  Metamagic rod (substitution)  CHAPTER 4  Sturdy chain links carved of metal and fused together form the haft of this sturdy rod. The head is a single ruby.  Metamagic rod (sculpting)  MIRROR OF TIME HOP Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1/2 lb. This silver hand mirror is exceedingly smooth, even slippery, to the touch. When activated, a mirror of time hop must be held in such a way as to force a creature within 30 feet to see its own reflection. This functions as a gaze attack; any creature that fails a DC 14 Will save is pushed 5 rounds forward in time. In effect, the creature disappears in a shimmer of silver energy, then reappears after the duration expires in the same position, orientation, and condition. From the creature’s point of view, no time has passed. Any active effects on the creature simply resume when it appears as if no time had passed. The creature can act normally on its next turn after the effect ends. A mirror of time hop functions two times per day, and each activation of the mirror  165  620_10762_Chp4.indd 165  12/21/06 5:46:26 AM  Crystal anchor of alertness  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Memento magica  Illus. by E. Widermann & S. Ellis  Cognizance crystal  Talisman of undying fortitude  Strand of acid pearls  can affect only a single creature. A mirror’s wielder is immune to her mirror’s effect. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dimension door or time hop (EPH 137). Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  NOBLE PENNON Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: —; see text Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  increases by 1, and his smite evil attacks deal an extra 2 points of damage. In addition, a pennon has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Activating a pennon and spending 1 or more charges grants you a morale bonus on Fortitude or Will saves (your choice when activated) for 3 rounds. 1 charge: +2 morale bonus.  2 charges: +3 morale bonus. 3 charges: +4 morale bonus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, heroism. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  OLLAMH HARP Price (Item Level): 50,100 gp (18th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) transmutation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb.  A lion rampant adorns this narrow, finely woven streamer.  This elongated green lap harp is strung with gold. Twinkling red rubies adorn its frame.  At the touch of a paladin or knight (PH2 24), the image on this narrow banner changes to represent the coat of arms of its bearer. Once claimed, it can be transferred to a new owner only if the current owner is willing or the current owner dies. A pennon can be attached to a lance, carried by a cohort or follower, or flown as a standard from a saddle or any fi xed object. Mounting a pennon is a standard action. As long as a noble pennon flies within 60 feet of the knight or paladin who owns it, the save DC for his knight’s challenge  This masterwork lap harp grants you a +2 circumstance bonus on Perform (string instruments) checks. If you have at least 14 ranks in Perform (string instruments), you can also command it to produce one of three spell effects (control weather, eyebite, or repulsion), each once per day. If you pick up an Ollamh harp but do not have 14 or more ranks in Perform (string instruments), the instrument bestows one negative level on you, which persists for as long as you hold it. This negative level never results in actual level loss, but it cannot be overcome in any way  166  620_10762_Chp4.indd 166  Noble pennon  12/21/06 5:46:29 AM  (including restoration spells) while the instrument is held. Lore: See Anstruth harp (page 150). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, control weather, eyebite, repulsion, bard. Cost to Create: 25,000 gp (plus 100 gp for masterwork harp), 2,000 XP, 51 days.  ORB OF BLINDING  ORB OF ENVIRONMENTAL ADAPTATION Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held); see text Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: —  ORB OF MENTAL RENEWAL Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  PEARL OF BRAIN LOCK Price (Item Level): 900 gp (4th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) enchantment Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: — This tiny pearl is engraved with the draconic symbol for the mind.  This orb of bronze and gold shines like the sun rising over the desert. An orb of mental renewal allows you to heal mental ability damage taken by yourself  You can hurl a pearl of brain lock as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 10 feet. If the target fails a DC 13 Will saving throw, the pearl seems to impact and then enter the flesh of the creature, dazing it for 3 rounds. This is a mindaffecting ability.  Illus. by E. Widermann  An orb of blinding can emit a brilliant burst of light that blinds all creatures within a 15-foot cone for 1 round (Fort DC 16 negates). An orb of blinding can generate this effect three times per day, but it can’t be activated in consecutive rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, color spray. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  TOOLS  This round, fist-sized opalescent crystal glows faintly.  An orb of environmental adaptation provides a group of creatures relief from extreme environments. When you hold the orb in your hand and activate it, it transforms into a faintly glowing sphere of protection centered on you. The radius of this sphere can vary between 5 and 30 feet (and can be altered by you as a move action). All creatures and objects within the sphere take no harm from being in a hot or cold environment. They can exist comfortably in conditions between –50 and 140 degrees Fahrenheit, and their equipment is likewise protected. An orb of environmental adaptation functions for up to seven consecutive days, after which it is dormant for seven days. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, endure elements. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  or another. To use the orb, you must hold it while touching the target to be affected (or merely hold the orb, if affecting yourself). The orb has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges heals damage to one or more mental ability scores. 1 charge: Heal 4 points of Int, Wis, or Cha damage (your choice), or 2 points of damage to all three ability scores. 2 charges: Heal 6 points of Int, Wis, or Cha damage (your choice), or 3 points of damage to all three ability scores. 3 charges: Heal 8 points of Int, Wis, or Cha damage (your choice), or 4 points of damage to all three ability scores. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, lesser restoration. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) illusion Activation: Standard (command) Weight: —  This transparent crystal sphere faintly glows green and is the size of a small plum.  Orb of mental renewal Orb of environmental adaptation  Aberrant sphere  Orb of blinding  Globe of sunlight  167  620_10762_Chp4.indd 167  12/21/06 5:46:35 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  A flying creature affected by a pearl of brain lock is allowed to descend to the nearest safe, level area rather than be dazed, while a swimmer incapable of breathing water is allowed to head directly for the surface. In either case, the creature is dazed for the remaining duration once it has reached safety. Once activated, a pearl is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, daze monster or brain lock (EPH 81). Cost to Create: 450 gp, 36 XP, 1 day.  PEARL OF BREATH CRISIS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: —  Illus. by W. England  A draconic rune representing the body has been carefully engraved on this small pearl. You can hurl a pearl of breath crisis as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 10 feet. If it strikes a humanoid that fails a DC 14 Will saving throw, the pearl seems to impact and then enter the flesh of the creature, compelling it to purge itself of breath. For the next 5 rounds, the creature can continue to breathe only by taking a standard action each round to do so. This is a mind-affecting ability. At the end of each of the target’s turns in which it chooses not to consciously take a breath, it must succeed on a DC 14 Fortitude save or begin to suffocate, falling to 0 hit points and potentially dying in later rounds (DMG 304), as long as the duration continues. If the effect ends before a suffocating creature has died, the creature is no longer considered to be suffocating. Once activated, a pearl is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, suggestion or crisis of breath (EPH 89). Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  PERSONAL OASIS Price (Item Level): 4,600 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration, evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. A brightly colored oasis complete with fruitbearing desert trees and bright blue water covers the surface of this woven blanket. It smells slightly of old incense. When you unroll this 10-foot-by-10-foot blanket and activate it, a 5-foot-by-10-foot tent springs from the blanket, along with a campfire, a bowl of dates, and a gallon of cool water. The tent functions in all ways as a Leomund’s tiny hut spell. The campfire burns continuously, never needing fuel, and the dates provide enough food to sustain a person for one day. When you speak the command word again, a personal oasis rolls back up into blanket form. A personal oasis functions once per day for up to 10 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create food and water, Leomund’s tiny hut, produce flame. Cost to Create: 2,300 gp, 184 XP, 5 days.  PIPES OF FRENZIED REVELRY [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) enchantment Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb.  This set of pan pipes is made of hollowed-out reeds lashed together with sturdy vines. Somewhere on the surface of each reed is the symbol of Olidammara. When you play these pipes, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Perform (wind instruments) checks if you are chaotic neutral, neutral, chaotic good, or chaotic evil. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can attempt a DC 25 Perform (wind instruments) check each round that you are playing the pipes. If you succeed, every living creature within 30 feet must make a successful DC 16 Will save or be affected as if by a confusion spell, with one exception: Whenever the die roll calls for the subject to attack another creature, the subject instead makes a mildly amorous advance (such as an embrace or kiss) toward the target creature. For each affected creature, this effect lasts as long as the piping continues (a standard action each round) and you are within 30 feet of that creature at the end of your turn. If your playing is interrupted, or you fail a Perform check and then resume piping with a successful check, every creature within 30 feet can make a new save attempt. Subjects that successfully save are immune to the pipes of frenzied revelry for the next 24 hours. To use the relic power, you must worship Olidammara and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: These pipes were originally created by a secretive order of bard/clerics devoted to Olidammara. For the past several centuries, members of the order have distributed them to musically inclined followers of the deity (Knowledge [religion] DC 15). Rumor holds that a satyr named Elovan came into possession of a set of these pipes and used them to woo a fair princess while she was on a picnic in the woods with her court. Since then, members of that nation’s royal family have occasionally displayed odd physical quirks, such as unusually hairy legs and vestigial horns, as well as an unusual aptitude for music (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, confusion. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  Pipes of frenzied revelry  168  620_10762_Chp4.indd 168  12/21/06 5:46:39 AM  Price (Item Level): 800 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: — The liquid in this vial is dark brown, shot through with vertical threads of white and tan.  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — A row of tiny runes lines the edge of this matte black piece of circular canvas. When placed on a flat surface, a portable foxhole creates a shallow extradimensional pit 5 feet square and 3 feet deep. A foxhole provides cover against ranged attacks. Any items or creatures in a portable foxhole when it is picked up (another standard action) are dumped out unharmed in the space the foxhole occupied. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, move earth. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  POWDER OF THE BLACK VEIL Price (Item Level): 750 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: —  TOOLS  PORTABLE FOXHOLE  Skin of the Celestial  The effect of a porcupine elixir is dramatic  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 10th Au ra: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb.  This sooty, black powder comes in a small tin, which is set with pieces of jet in the shape of dark-colored goggles.  Once activated, the stainless white skin of the celestial bathes you in a shimmering golden halo.  When you cast this sooty, black powder into an area, it creates a 10-foot-high cloud in a 10-foot spread, centered on you (but not moving with you). The cloud remains for 2d4 rounds, and any creature, other than you, caught in the area (or one that enters it) is blinded for as long as it stays in the cloud and for 1d4 rounds after it leaves (Will DC 13 negates). Once activated, a dose of this powder is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, blindness/deafness. Cost to Create: 375 gp, 30 XP, 1 day.  When activated, this skin grants you the following abilities for 7 rounds (if you already have one of these abilities, use your own values if higher): • Damage reduction 5/magic. • Darkvision 60 feet. • Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10. • Smite Evil (Su): Once during the skin’s duration, you can attempt a normal melee attack to deal an extra 10 points of damage against an evil foe. If you accidentally smite a creature that is not evil, or if your smite attack misses, the smite has no effect, but the ability is still used up for that day. • Spell resistance 15.  PSYCHOACTIVE SKIN This fist-sized blob of murky ectoplasm shimmers faintly in the light. Once a psychoactive skin is donned, the ball unfolds, extends, and surrounds a Medium or smaller wearer’s entire body in a variegated second skin, granting the wearer access to a particular array of abilities (see below). Donning a psychoatcive skin requires a mental command as a standard action. A deployed skin completely covers the wearer and all his equipment, but allows him to see, hear, and breathe normally. It rolls away from various parts of the body  Illus. by S. Prescott  Imbibing porcupine elixir toughens your skin, granting you a +1 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) In addition, hundreds of needle-sharp quills sprout from your body. These quills enable you to deal 1d6 points of piercing damage with a successful grapple attack. The quills sprout through light armor or hide armor, but heavier armors prevent them from growing. The effect of this elixir lasts for 12 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, alter self, Craft (alchemy) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 400 gp, 32 XP, 1 day.  CHAPTER 4  as needed, such as when the wearer needs to eat or access a backpack. Held items or items specifically excluded are not covered up. Up to three skins can be worn simultaneously, although only the outermost is active in any given round (the powers of the hidden skins cannot be activated or accessed). Skin layers can be changed as a standard (mental) action, which causes the desired lower-layer skin to come to the surface.  PORCUPINE ELIXIR  A skin of the celestial functions once per day. At the end of its duration, it falls dormant until the following dawn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, lesser holy transformation (SC 116) or planar apotheosis (CP 93). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  169  620_10762_Chp4.indd 169  12/21/06 5:46:42 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Skin of Celestial Embrace  Skin of the Claw  Price (Item Level): 24,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb.  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb.  This iridescent white skin bathes you in a shimmering golden halo when activated.  This skin ripples with suppressed power once worn.  When activated, a skin of celestial embrace grants you the following abilities for 15 rounds (if you already have any of these abilities, use your own values if higher): • +4 bonus on Fortitude saves against poison. • Damage reduction 10/magic. • Darkvision 60 feet. • Feathered wings that allow you to fly at twice your base land speed with good maneuverability. • Immunity to disease. • Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10. • Smite Evil (Su): Once during the skin’s duration, you can attempt a normal melee attack to deal an extra 15 points of damage against an evil foe. If you accidentally smite a creature that is not evil, or if your smite attack misses, the smite has no effect, but the ability is still used up for that day. • Spell resistance 25.  A skin of the claw benefits you only if you are a psychic warrior. If you are a psychic warrior and you wear this skin, you can transform your hands into deadly claws. You gain two primary natural claw attacks, each dealing 1d6 points of damage (if you are Medium) plus your Strength modifier. You can’t combine these claw attacks with other weapon or natural weapon attacks as part of the same full attack action. You can return your hands to their previous form with another swift (mental) action. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, claws of the bear (SC 47) or claws of the beast (EPH 83). Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  This skin grants you a +8 armor bonus. The skin has a maximum Dexterity bonus of +2, a –6 armor check penalty, and a 25% arcane spell failure chance. It is treated as light armor for the purpose of affecting class features and movement. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, mage armor or inertial armor (EPH 113). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  Skin of the Fiend  A skin of celestial embrace functions once per day. At the end of its duration, it falls dormant until the following dawn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, holy transformation (SC 116) or planar embrace (CP 94). Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  Skin of the Chameleon Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This skin adjusts its color and texture according to your surroundings. A skin of the chameleon adjusts to your surrounding textures and colors, continually granting you a +10 competence bonus on Hide checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, darkness or chameleon (EPH 82). Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Skin of the Defender Price (Item Level): 32,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This thick, rough skin gives your body an appearance similar to tree bark. This skin continually grants a +4 enhancement bonus to your natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, barkskin or thicken skin (EPH 137). Cost to Create: 16,000 gp, 1,280 XP, 32 days.  Skin of Ectoplasmic Armor Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This silvery, translucent skin appears to surround you in a suit of crystalline plates.  Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. This deep red skin raises tiny horns from your forehead. When activated, a skin of the fiend grants you the following abilities for 7 rounds (if you already have any of these abilities, use your own values if higher): • Damage reduction 5/magic. • Darkvision 60 feet. • Resistance to cold 10 and fire 10. • Smite Good (Su): Once during the skin’s duration, you can attempt a normal melee attack to deal an extra 10 points of damage against a good foe. If you accidentally smite a creature that is not good, or if your smite attack misses, the smite has no effect, but the ability is still used up for that day. • Spell resistance 15. A skin of the fiend functions once per day. At the end of its duration, it falls dormant until the following dawn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, lesser infernal transformation (SC 122) or planar apotheosis (CP 93). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  Skin of Fiendish Embrace Price (Item Level): 24,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. This glistening, blood-red skin raises horns the color of bloodied bones from your forehead. When activated, a skin of fiendish embrace grants you the following abilities for 15 rounds (if you already have any of these abilities, use your own values if higher):  170  620_10762_Chp4.indd 170  12/21/06 5:46:47 AM  Price (Item Level): 60,000 gp (18th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. Once donned, this skin pulses with occasional bursts of energy the color of flame. A skin of fiery response answers the first melee or ranged attack made against you in each round with a targeted blast against the attacker. The blast of fire emits from the skin at the start of your next turn, making a ranged touch attack against the attacker if within line of sight and line of effect (up to a maximum distance of 40 feet). You must also be able to identify the source of the attack. For instance, if the attack comes from a foe that is hiding or invisible, the attacker cannot be identified and is not targeted by the effect. The ranged touch attack uses your base attack bonus plus either your Dexterity modifier or the key ability modifier of your high-  Price (Item Level): 77,000 gp (19th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) no school Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This skin gives your body a silvery hue. This skin continually grants its wearer a +3 deflection bonus to Armor Class, a +3 resistance bonus on saving throws, and a +3 enhancement bonus on attack rolls. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, limited wish or bend reality (EPH 80). Cost to Create: 38,500 gp, 3,080 XP, 77 days. Psychoactive skin  Price (Item Level): 40,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. Your body turns a uniform gray color while this skin is worn and active. When activated, this skin grants you the benefit of the iron body spell with a duration of 15 minutes. At the end of its duration, it falls dormant until the following dawn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, iron body. Cost to Create: 20,000 gp, 1,600 XP, 40 days.  TOOLS  Skin of Fiery Response  Skin of the Hero  Skin of Iron  Skin of Nimbleness Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This skin is supportive and slightly tacky. This skin continually grants you a +10 competence bonus on Tumble checks. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Tumble 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Illus. by H. Hudson  A skin of fiendish embrace functions once per day. At the end of its duration, it falls dormant until the following dawn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, infernal transformation (SC 122) or planar embrace (CP 94). Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  est-level spellcasting class (your choice) and deals 4d6+4 points of fire damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, scorching ray or energy retort (EPH 137). Cost to Create: 30,000 gp, 2,400 XP, 60 days.  CHAPTER 4  • Damage reduction 10/magic. • Darkvision 60 feet. • Batlike wings that allow you to fly at your base land speed with average maneuverability. • Claws: Two primary claw attacks that each deal 1d6 points of damage (assuming you are Medium). • Immunity to poison. • Resistance to acid 10, cold 10, electricity 10, and fire 10. • Smite Good (Su): Once during the skin’s duration, you can attempt a normal melee attack to deal an extra 15 points of damage against a good foe. If you accidentally smite a creature that is not good, or if your smite attack misses, the smite has no effect, but the ability is still used up for that day. • Spell resistance 25.  Skin of Power Damping Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: 2 lb. Your body has a faint blue cast while you wear this translucent skin. This skin provides no benefits while worn unless it is activated. When it is activated, all numeric effects of any spell, spelllike ability, power, or psi-like ability that affects you (whether harmful or beneficial) are minimized for you (but not for any other creatures affected by the spell, power, or ability) for 1 round.  171  620_10762_Chp4.indd 171  12/21/06 5:46:48 AM  CHAPTER 4  For example, if you were struck by a lightning bolt from a 5th-level wizard, you would take only 5 points of damage (or 2 points if you successfully save). A skin of power damping functions three times per day. At the end of its duration, it falls dormant until the following dawn. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, antimagic field or damp power (CP 82). Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  TOOLS  Skin of the Psion Price (Item Level): 90,000 gp (20th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration Activation: — Weight: 2 lb.  Illus. by J. Zhang  This psychoactive skin glows pale blue with power when active. This skin grants you 7 additional power points per day and spell resistance 21. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spell resistance or power resistance (EPH 124). Cost to Create: 45,000 gp, 3,600 XP, 90 days.  Skin of the Troll Price (Item Level): 61,000 gp (18th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. Your body appears rough, cracked, and covered with blemishes as long as you wear this skin. This skin heals you of 5 points of damage per minute. This benefit is not effective against damage from starvation, thirst, or suffocation. The skin also regrows lost portions of your body and allows you to reattach severed limbs. If you don’t have a Constitution score, a skin of the troll has no effect on you. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, regenerate or true metabolism (EPH 124). Cost to Create: 30,500 gp, 2,440 XP, 61 days.  Q uiver of energy  Skin of the Spider Price (Item Level): 40,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: 2 lb. This midnight-blue skin is highlighted with a red spiderweb pattern and large black-rimmed white eyes. This skin grants you a +10 competence bonus on Climb checks. The skin also automatically adjusts your body’s equilibrium to correspond with any solid or liquid upon which you stand. This allows you to move (but not run) across water, quicksand, or even a spider’s web at your normal speed. These are continuous effects and require no activation. Three times per day, you can fire a glob of goo at a Medium or smaller target within 30 feet as a ranged touch attack. If successful, the target is entangled for 5 rounds (Strength DC 20 or Escape Artist DC 20 to escape). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, water walk or body equilibrium (EPH 124), web or entangling ectoplasm (EPH 104), Climb 10 ranks. Cost to Create: 20,000 gp, 1,600 XP, 40 days.  QUIVER OF ENERGY Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. (3 lb. when full) Constructed of supple leather, this quiver is festooned with arcane symbols. A quiver of energy can hold up to 20 arrows or bolts. Each quiver imbues arrows or bolts drawn from it with a particular type of energy (acid, cold, electricity, or fire), indicated by the arcane symbols it bears. Such projectiles, if left within the quiver  for at least 1 round before being drawn, deal an extra 1d6 points of the appropriate type of damage. The projectile loses this extra damage after it is used in an attack, or 1 round after it is drawn (whichever comes first). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, energy missile (CP 88) or the appropriate spell from the following: lightning bolt, ice storm, fireball, or Melf’s acid arrow. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  RADIANT SPHERE Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: See text Weight: 1 lb. This bright yellow crystal globe feels faintly warm to the touch. These spheres are prized possessions of priests who worship a god of sun or light. As long as at least 1 charge remains (see below), a radiant sphere continuously sheds bright illumination in a 20-foot radius and shadowy illumination out to 20 feet beyond that. This effect requires no activation. A radiant sphere has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges as a standard (command) action creates a ray of pure light that extends up to 60 feet. The ray requires a successful ranged touch attack. 1 charge: The ray deals 4d6 points of damage to any undead creature it hits. 2 charges: The ray deals 6d6 points of damage to any undead creature it hits. 3 charges: The ray deals 6d6 points of damage to any undead creature it hits, as well as 2d6 points of damage to each undead creature within 10 feet of the target (no save). While holding a sphere, you can recharge it by expending a daily use of your turn undead ability or sacrificing a spell with the light descriptor. This is a full-round (manipulation) action. Each expended spell or turn undead attempt adds 1 charge to the sphere, up to its maximum of 3 charges. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, daylight, searing light, turn undead. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  172  620_10762_Chp4.indd 172  12/21/06 5:46:55 AM  REPLENISHING SKIN Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 4 lb.  RHINO ELIXIR Price (Item Level): 1,600 gp (5th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: —  Drinking rhino elixir causes your skin to thicken and turn gray, granting you a +3 enhancement bonus to your existing natural armor bonus. (A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0.) In addition, you gain a +1 bonus on melee damage rolls. These effects last for 12 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, alter self, Craft (alchemy) 5 ranks. Cost to Create: 800 gp, 64 XP, 2 days.  A rod of bodily restoration allows you to heal physical ability damage. To use the rod, you must touch the target to be affected (or merely hold the rod, if affecting yourself). The rod has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges heals damage to one or more of the target’s physical ability scores. 1 charge: Heal 4 points of Str, Dex, or Con damage (your choice), or 2 points of damage to all three ability scores. 2 charges: Heal 6 points of Str, Dex, or Con damage (your choice), or 3 points of damage to all three ability scores. 3 charges: Heal 8 points of Str, Dex, or Con damage (your choice), or 4 points of damage to all three ability scores. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, lesser restoration. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  Fragile in appearance, this rod is shaped like a long thin ladder. A rod of escape allows you to use jump and knock (as the spells) each two times per day. Also, once per day you can create a 5-foot-radius spherical ward that repels open water or other nonmagical waterbased liquids (but not creatures), allowing you to cross shallow rivers or fully enter deep bodies of water and remain dry. The rod generates fresh air within this space, so no chance of suffocation exists. This effect lasts for 10 minutes. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, control water, jump, knock. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 70 XP, 4 days.  ROD OF FORCE Price (Item Level): 60,000 gp (18th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: See text Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by S. Ellis  This vial holds a light gray liquid. Curling layers of lighter and darker colors within it give the impression of wrinkles and folds.  Dawn motifs are worked into this leatherwrapped rod.  Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  TOOLS  Whenever a replenishing skin becomes empty, it slowly refills with cool, pure water over a period of 1d4 hours. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, create water. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command and manipulation) Weight: 4 lb.  ROD OF ESCAPE  CHAPTER 4  This waterskin looks to be made from the hide of a lizard or toad. It is moist to the touch, as if the skin were still alive.  ROD OF BODILY RESTORATION  Replenishing skin  Truelight lantern  Jumping caltrops  Troll gut rope  173  620_10762_Chp4.indd 173  12/21/06 5:46:57 AM  effect. This is an enchantment (compulsion), mind-affecting ability. A rod of fumbling functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, command. Cost to Create: 1,150 gp, 92 XP, 3 days.  ROD OF GRIEVOUS WOUNDS TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb.  Illus. by W. England  Every inch of this long, stark white ivory scepter is adorned with abstract carvings. The tiny lines of the engraved symbols twist and twine together to form one complete and complex design.  Conduit rod  Flesheater  Harrow rod  Rod of frost  Magic siphon  Rod of force  This black iron rod is 18 inches long and a half inch wide. It hums with suppressed power.  This 2-foot-long rod of steel-hard, ice-blue glass is bound with iron bands.  A rod of force can be used five times per day. Each time you activate this rod, you can choose to create one of the following effects. Blade of Force: Upon command, a 3foot-long glowing blade of force springs forth from the rod. This “blade” can be used as a +1 brilliant energy longsword and lasts for 10 rounds. Activating this power is a swift (command) action. Blast of Force: Upon command, a ray of force projects from the rod out to a maximum distance of 100 feet. This ranged touch attack deals 10d6 points of damage. Activating this power is a standard (command) action. Wall of Force: This effect functions as the spell. Activating this power is a standard (command) action. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, magic missile, Mordenkainen’s sword, wall of force. Cost to Create: 30,000 gp, 2,400 XP, 60 days.  A rod of frost emits a beam of cold that can create a variety of effects. Three times per day, you can fire a 30foot line of frost from the rod. The line of frost deals 2d6 points of cold damage to all creatures in the area (Reflex DC 14 half). Natural fires in the area of the line are automatically extinguished, and open water in the area of the line freezes to a depth of 1 foot—thick enough for a Large creature to walk upon safely. The ice melts normally. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, ray of frost. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  ROD OF FROST Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 5 lb.  174  620_10762_Chp4.indd 174  ROD OF FUMBLING Price (Item Level): 2,300 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — A spiral groove runs the length of this 3-footlong, gray lacquered wooden rod. A rod of fumbling instills sudden clumsiness in a nearby creature. When you activate the rod, a chosen creature within 30 feet must immediately drop all items it holds (without waiting until its turn). A successful DC 15 Will save negates the  When activated, a rod of grievous wounds deals 1d8+5 points of damage to each creature adjacent to you that has fewer than its full normal hit points. A rod of grievous wounds functions five times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, mass inflict light wounds. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  ROD OF REVERSAL [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) abjuration Activation: Standard (command) and — Weight: 5 lb. This steel rod looks like a length of thick chain, but its links are fixed in place, preventing it from bending even slightly. Though they were created for arcane spellcasters who engaged in frequent magical duels, these rods are also a boon to anyone who battles spellcasters. When you wield a rod of reversal, you can command it to automatically reflect the next three levels of spells that target you, as if you were under a lesser version of a spell turning spell, provided that you are neutral, neutral good, neutral evil, chaotic neutral, or lawful neutral. This ability functions three times per day. Turning a spell changes the rod’s color, depending on the school of the spell turned, as given on the following table.  12/21/06 5:47:02 AM  School Abjuration Conjuration Divination Enchantment Evocation Illusion Necromancy Transmutation  Color Blue Yellow Indigo Green Red Violet Black Orange  This 4-foot-long rod of black metal bears the impression of a single cat’s paw at one rounded end. While holding this rod, you gain a +4 bonus on saving throws against effects that have the sonic descriptor or that deal sonic damage. Once per day, you can surround yourself with a field of silence, which functions as a silence spell except it affects only you and can be dismissed as a free (mental) action on your turn. The rod can also create a shout effect once per day, although this ability cannot be used while the silence effect is in operation. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, shout, silence, resistance. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  A pale blue crystal adorns each end of this silvery rod.  Rod of reversal  ROD OF SLIDING Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. Small magnets are set into the ends of this iron rod. When activated, this rod can either push a targeted creature 5 feet farther away from you or pull it 5 feet closer to you. The target must be within 30 feet of you and must end its movement in an unoccupied square. The movement does not provoke attacks of opportunity. An unwilling creature is  When you activate a rod of sure striking, every ally adjacent to you gains a +5 insight bonus on its next attack roll, provided that the attack occurs before the beginning of your next turn. A rod of sure striking functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, true strike. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  ROD OF TRANSPOSITION Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. Small bolts of lightning arc from one end of this engraved copper rod to the other. When you activate a rod of transposition, you exchange positions with another creature within 30 feet. An unwilling creature gets a DC 13 Will saving throw to negate this effect. A rod of transposition functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, baleful transposition (SC 23). Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  ROD OF UNDEAD MASTERY Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — Weight: 3 lb. Rod of sure striking  620_10762_Chp4.indd 175  TOOLS  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) divination Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb.  CHAPTER 4  ROD OF SILENCE  ROD OF SURE STRIKING  Illus. by W. England  Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, a rod of reversal instead reflects the next nine levels of spells cast at you when it is activated. It also continuously grants you the Improved Counterspell feat. To use the relic power, you must worship Boccob and either sacrifice an 8th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 15 HD. Lore: These rods were originally created by an elite group of wizards with a penchant for magical dueling. In the centuries since, they have come into the possession of mage hunters as well as magical duelists (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Rod, Sanctify Relic, spell turning. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  entitled to a DC 11 Will saving throw to negate the effect. A rod of sliding functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, slide (SC 191). Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  175  12/21/06 5:47:05 AM  This metal rod is fashioned to resemble a stack of miniature skulls.  Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb.  Rod of sliding  Rod of silence  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  While holding a rod of undead mastery, you can control twice as many Hit Dice of undead as you normally could. For instance, if you can normally control 12 HD of undead, you can control 24 HD of undead while holding the rod. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, desecrate. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  This roughly carved staff is made from the heartwood of an ancient tree. A runestaff of abjuration allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • dismissal • dispel magic • lesser globe of invulnerability • repulsion • resist energy • shield Prerequisites: Craft Staff, dismissal, dispel magic, lesser globe of invulnerability, repulsion, resist energy, shield. Cost to Create: 16,000 gp, 1,280 XP, 32 days.  Illus. by W. England  ROD OF VISCID GLOBS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 2 lb.  Rod of viscid globs  An ooze of amber fluid leaks from this strangely sappy mahogany rod. The rod’s surface is carved with tumorous bumps and weeping cysts. A rod of viscid globs fires a sphere of sticky material that acts like a tanglefoot bag. The rod can fire a glob up to 100 feet, and a glob acts as a splash weapon. A rod of viscid globs can be used three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, entangle. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  ROPE OF CLIMBING, SUPERIOR Price (Item Level): 5,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. This thick length of knotted rope is slightly sticky to the touch. This item functions like a rope of climbing (DMG 266), except that it also grants a +5 circumstance bonus on Climb checks made to ascend it. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, animate rope. Cost to Create: 2,750 gp, 220 XP, 6 days.  Rod of undead mastery  Soul anchor  ROPE OF STONE Price (Item Level): 800 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 5 lb. This 50-foot coil of silk rope has a silvery sheen. This silk rope becomes as hard as stone (hardness 8, 15 hp) when you speak the command word (but remains just as climbable as normal). A second command word returns the rope to its normal composition. The rope retains its exact shape when hardened (which adds 5 to the DC of Escape Artist checks made to slip free of it). If the rope is ever broken in either form, it is destroyed. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, stone shape. Cost to Create: 400 gp, 32 XP, 1 day.  RUNESTAFF OF ABJURATION Price (Item Level): 32,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration  RUNESTAFF OF THE ARCHITECT Price (Item Level): 30,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 5 lb. This staff is made of oak shod with iron. A runestaff of the architect allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • move earth • stone shape • wall of stone • wood shape Prerequisites: Craft Staff, move earth, stone shape, wall of stone, wood shape. Cost to Create: 15,000 gp, 1,200 XP, 30 days.  RUNESTAFF OF THE ARTISAN Price (Item Level): 23,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration, transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 5 lb.  176  620_10762_Chp4.indd 176  12/21/06 5:47:12 AM  This extremely well-crafted staff is gilded in gold. It bears a small rune of a hand at the center of its length.  Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) illusion Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb. This simple, slim staff is only 4 feet long. It is fastened to a leather strap to make it easy to sling over your shoulder. It bears a small rune of a dagger on one end. A runestaff of the assassin allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • greater invisibility • obscuring mist • pass without trace • poison Prerequisites: Craft Staff, greater invisibility, obscuring mist, pass without trace, poison. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  RUNESTAFF OF CACOPHONY Price (Item Level): 26,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 16th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb. This thin, iron staff is forked at one end. A rune depicting a warped musical note is inscribed below the fork.  Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) enchantment Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This twisting and ornately carved staff is shaped from brightly colored tropical wood. A runestaff of charming allows you to cast either of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • charm monster • charm person Prerequisites: Craft Staff, charm monster, charm person. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  RUNESTAFF OF CONJURATION Price (Item Level): 25,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This ash staff bears a number of ornate runes depicting animals. A runestaff of conjuration allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • cloudkill • minor creation • stinking cloud • summon monster VI • summon swarm • unseen servant  RUNESTAFF OF DESTRUCTION Price (Item Level): 27,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb.  TOOLS  RUNESTAFF OF THE ASSASSIN  RUNESTAFF OF CHARMING  Prerequisites: Craft Staff, cloudkill, minor creation, stinking cloud, summon monster VI, summon swarm, unseen servant. Cost to Create: 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days.  CHAPTER 4  A runestaff of the artisan allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • fabricate • major creation • mending • minor creation Prerequisites: Craft Staff, fabricate, major creation, mending, minor creation Cost to Create: 11,500 gp, 920 XP, 23 days.  A runestaff of cacophony allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • shout • shout, greater • sound burst • sympathetic vibration Prerequisites: Craft Staff, greater shout, shout, sound burst, sympathetic vibration. Cost to Create: 13,000 gp, 1,040 XP, 26 days.  This staff is very long and made of marble. Despite appearances, it is extremely light. It bears a small rune of a shattered mask on the top end. A runestaff of destruction allows you to cast any of the following spells (each once per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • disintegrate • earthquake • shatter Prerequisites: Craft Staff, disintegrate, earthquake, shatter. Cost to Create: 13,500 gp, 1080 XP, 27 days.  RUNESTAFF OF DIVINATION Price (Item Level): 21,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: As spell used Weight: 2 lb. This forked staff is made of supple willow. A rune of an eye sits below the fork. A runestaff of divination allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • detect secret doors • locate creature • locate object • prying eyes • tongues • true seeing Prerequisites: Craft Staff, detect secret doors, locate creature, locate object, prying eyes, tongues, true seeing. Cost to Create: 10,500 gp, 840 XP, 21 days.  177  620_10762_Chp4.indd 177  12/21/06 5:47:16 AM  RUNESTAFF OF EARTH AND STONE  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 24,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb.  RUNESTAFF OF ENTRAPMENT Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration, evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb.  This short staff is carved of almost unbreakable gray stone, tipped on one end with a fist-sized emerald that gleams with smoldering power.  This 4-foot-long staff of brass is covered in ancient carvings.  A runestaff of earth and stone allows you to cast either of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • move earth • passwall Prerequisites: Craft Staff, move earth, passwall. Cost to Create: 12,000 gp, 960 XP, 24 days.  A runestaff of entrapment allows you to cast either of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • dimensional anchor • Otiluke’s resilient sphere Prerequisites: Craft Staff, dimensional anchor, Otiluke’s resilient sphere. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  RUNESTAFF OF ENCHANTMENT  RUNESTAFF OF ETHEREAL ACTION  Price (Item Level): 32,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) enchantment Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb.  Price (Item Level): 31,300 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 14th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb.  This applewood staff is capped with a clear zircon crystal. It has a small rune depicting clasped hands.  This long staff is made of white wood and adorned with three silver bands.  A runestaff of enchantment allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • crushing despair • mass suggestion • mind fog • sleep • suggestion • Tasha’s hideous laughter Prerequisites: Craft Staff, crushing despair, mass suggestion, mind fog, sleep, suggestion, Tasha’s hideous laughter. Cost to Create: 16,000 gp, 1,280 XP, 32 days.  A runestaff of ethereal action is a +1/masterwork ghost touch quarterstaff that also allows you to cast either of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • blink • ethereal jaunt Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Staff, blink, ethereal jaunt. Cost to Create: 15,500 gp (plus 300 gp for masterwork quarterstaff), 1,240 XP, 31 days.  RUNESTAFF OF EVOCATION Price (Item Level): 25,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb.  This smooth, yew staff has a rune of an arrow halfway down its length. A runestaff of evocation allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • chain lightning • fireball • ice storm • magic missile • shatter • wall of force Prerequisites: Craft Staff, chain lightning, fireball, ice storm, magic missile, shatter, wall of fire. Cost to Create: 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days.  RUNESTAFF OF EYES Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This spiraling staff is covered with silver inlay and topped with a large piece of amber. A runestaff of eyes allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • arcane eye • remove blindness/deafness • see invisibility Prerequisites: Craft Staff, arcane eye, remove blindness/deafness, see invisibility. Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days.  RUNESTAFF OF FIENDISH DARKNESS Price (Item Level): 48,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) conjuration Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This staff is made of polished ebony topped with a tarnished iron claw at either end. A runestaff of fiendish darkness bestows one negative level on any good-aligned creature as long as it carries or holds the runestaff. The negative level never results in actual level loss, but cannot be over-  178  620_10762_Chp4.indd 178  12/21/06 5:47:17 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Illus. by W. England  Runestaffs, left to right: divination, frost, ﬁre, ﬁendish darkness, evocation, ethereal action, enchantment, charming, cacophony, the artisan, abjuration  179  620_10762_Chp4.indd 179  12/21/06 5:47:19 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  come in any way (including restoration spells) while the runestaff is held. This staff allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • animate dead • darkness • dispel magic • summon monster IX (nightmare only) Prerequisites: Craft Staff, animate dead, darkness, dispel magic, summon monster IX, evil alignment. Cost to Create: 24,000 gp, 1,920 XP, 48 days.  RUNESTAFF OF FIRE Price (Item Level): 8,400 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This staff is crafted from bronzewood with rune-scribed brass bindings. A runestaff of fire allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • burning hands • fireball • wall of fire Prerequisites: Craft Staff, burning hands, fireball, wall of fire. Cost to Create: 4,200 gp, 336 XP, 9 days.  RUNESTAFF OF FORCED HAPPINESS Price (Item Level): 18,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 16th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) enchantment Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb. This smooth alabaster staff feels hollow, but doesn’t seem fragile or easily chipped. A runestaff of forced happiness allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • celebration (SC 44) • Otto’s irresistible dance • Tasha’s hideous laughter  Prerequisites: Craft Staff, celebration, Otto’s irresistible dance, Tasha’s hideous laughter. Cost to Create: 9,000 gp, 720 XP, 18 days.  RUNESTAFF OF FROST Price (Item Level): 20,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This rune-covered staff is made from white wood and silver, and is tipped at each end with a glittering diamond. A runestaff of frost allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • cone of cold • ice storm • wall of ice Prerequisites: Craft Staff, cone of cold, ice storm, wall of ice. Cost to Create: 10,000 gp, 800 XP, 20 days.  RUNESTAFF OF ILLUMINATION Price (Item Level): 34,500 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) evocation Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb. This slim silver staff features a rune of a sunburst. It seems to reflect light as if it were a polished mirror that never tarnishes. A runestaff of illumination allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • dancing lights • daylight • flare • sunburst Prerequisites: Craft Staff, dancing lights, daylight, flare, sunburst. Cost to Create: 17,250 gp, 1,380 XP, 35 days.  RUNESTAFF OF ILLUSION Price (Item Level): 19,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) illusion Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb. This twisted ebony staff has a rune of a halfmask near one end. A runestaff of illusion allows you to cast any of the following spells (each once per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • disguise self • major image • mirror image • mislead • persistent image • rainbow pattern Prerequisites: Craft Staff, disguise self, major image, mirror image, mislead, persistent image, rainbow pattern. Cost to Create: 9,500 gp, 760 XP, 19 days.  RUNESTAFF OF INSANITY Price (Item Level): 46,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) illusion Activation: As spell used Weight: 5 lb. This staff is formed from wildly twisting rods of solid iron. It bears numerous runes depicting cracked, warped, human skulls. A runestaff of insanity allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • confusion • insanity • lesser confusion • weird Prerequisites: Craft Staff, confusion, insanity, lesser confusion, weird. Cost to Create: 23,000 gp, 1,840 XP, 46 days.  RUNESTAFF OF NECROMANCY Price (Item Level): 32,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th  180  620_10762_Chp4.indd 180  12/21/06 5:47:27 AM  Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. Made of ebony and carved with images of bones and skulls, this staff is fitted at each end with a small ivory skull.  Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. Black onyx end caps adorn this ebony staff, which is carved with runes of darkness, night, and stars, as well as a rune that resembles an umber hulk. A runestaff of night allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • darkness (can counter or dispel any light spell, regardless of level) • darkvison • low-light vision This runestaff also allows you to cast the following spell once per day by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • summon monster VI (summons one fiendish umber hulk only) Prerequisites: Craft Staff, darkness, darkvison, low-light vision (SC 134), summon monster VI. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days.  This wooden staff is carved with the images of doors, many of which have embossed iron bindings and miniature—nonfunctional—keyholes. A runestaff of opening allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • knock • open/close • passwall • shatter Prerequisites: Craft Staff, knock, open/close, passwall, shatter. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  RUNESTAFF OF PASSAGE Price (Item Level): 75,000 gp (19th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 18th Aura: Strong; (DC 24) necromancy Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. Alternating sections of glass and mirror-polished steel comprise this slender staff. A runestaff of passage allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • astral projection • dimension door • greater teleport • passwall • phase door Prerequisites: Craft Staff, astral projection, dimension door, greater teleport, passwall, phase door. Cost to Create: 37,500 gp, 3,000 XP, 75 days.  RUNESTAFF OF POWER Price (Item Level): 38,300 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) abjuration  At the top of this smooth, jet-black staff is a single glistening gem. Several arcane runes have been etched into the crystal. A runestaff of power allows you to cast any of the following spells (each once per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • cone of cold • continual flame • fireball • globe of invulnerability • hold monster • levitate • lightning bolt • magic missile • ray of enfeeblement • wall of force (in a 5-foot-radius hemisphere around the wielder only)  TOOLS  RUNESTAFF OF NIGHT  Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb.  Activation: As spell used and swift (mental); see text Weight: 4 lb.  CHAPTER 4  A runestaff of necromancy allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • cause fear • circle of death • enervation • ghoul touch • halt undead • waves of fatigue Prerequisites: Craft Staff, cause fear, circle of death, enervation, ghoul touch, halt undead, waves of fatigue. Cost to Create: 16,000 gp, 1,280 XP, 32 days.  RUNESTAFF OF OPENING  In addition, a runestaff of power functions as a +2/masterwork quarterstaff and grants you a +2 luck bonus to AC and on saves as long as it is held. As a swift action, you can expend a 1st-level arcane spell or spell slot while holding a runestaff of power to activate a smite ability. Until the start of your next turn, all melee attacks made with the runestaff of power deal double damage (or triple damage on a critical hit). If you aren’t attuned to a runestaff of power (see page 224 for details on attunement), its enhancement bonus remains, but all its other abilities are unavailable to you. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Staff, cone of cold, continual flame, fireball, globe of invulnerability, hold monster, levitate, lightning bolt, magic missile, ray of enfeeblement, wall of force. Cost to Create: 19,000 gp (plus 300 gp for masterwork quarterstaff), 1,520 XP, 39 days.  RUNESTAFF OF SIZE ALTERATION Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 5 lb.  181  620_10762_Chp4.indd 181  12/21/06 5:47:29 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  This sturdy oak staff has a rune of a mouse morphing into an elephant at its tip. The staff is shaped like an hourglass—thick at both ends, but thin in the middle. A runestaff of illumination allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • enlarge person • mass enlarge person • mass reduce person • reduce person • shrink item Prerequisites: Craft Staff, enlarge person, mass enlarge person, mass reduce person, reduce person, shrink item. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  RUNESTAFF OF TIME Price (Item Level): 35,000 gp (16th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 17th Aura: Strong; (DC 23) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 3 lb. When you look at this staff, it becomes hard for your eyes to focus, as if the item is constantly blurring and shifting. A runestaff of time allows you to cast any of the following spells (each once per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • expeditious retreat • haste • temporal stasis • time stop Prerequisites: Craft Staff, expeditious retreat, haste, temporal stasis, time stop. Cost to Create: 17,500 gp, 1,400 XP, 35 days.  RUNESTAFF OF TRANSMUTATION Price (Item Level): 25,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. This petrified wood staff has a rune depicting the symbol for infinity emblazoned over bars of lead and gold.  A runestaff of transmutation allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • alter self • baleful polymorph • blink • disintegrate • expeditious retreat • stone shape Prerequisites: Craft Staff, alter self, baleful polymorph, blink, disintegrate, expeditious retreat, stone shape. Cost to Create: 12,500 gp, 1,000 XP, 25 days.  RUNESTAFF OF TRANSPORTATION Price (Item Level): 19,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. A hollow coil of wire fashioned in the shape of a staff, it has a mottled brown gemstone at both ends. A runestaff of transportation allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • blink • dimension door • teleport Prerequisites: Craft Staff, blink, dimension door, teleport. Cost to Create: 9,500 gp, 760 XP, 19 days.  RUNESTAFF OF THE UNDEAD SLAYER Price (Item Level): 37,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: As spell used Weight: 5 lb. This staff is formed from a solid piece of black marble. It is veined with lines of gold and silver. A runestaff of the undead slayer allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher.  • • • • •  death ward detect undead disrupting weapon searing light undeath to death Prerequisites: Craft Staff, death ward, detect undead, disrupting weapon, searing light, undeath to death. Cost to Create: 18,500 gp, 1,480 XP, 37 days.  RUNESTAFF OF THE UNDYING Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy Activation: As spell used Weight: 5 lb. This staff is formed from human bones bound together by copper wire. Each bone bears small skull runes. A runestaff of the undying allows you to cast any of the following spells (each two times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • animate dead • create undead Prerequisites: Craft Staff, animate dead, create undead. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  RUNESTAFF OF VISION Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) divination Activation: As spell used Weight: 4 lb. Cut from bamboo and fitted with white leather straps elegantly inked with runes, this slender staff seems unusually delicate. A runestaff of vision allows you to cast any of the following spells (each three times per day) by expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot of the same level or higher. • darkvision • see invisibility • true seeing Prerequisites: Craft Staff, darkvision, see invisibility, true seeing. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  182  620_10762_Chp4.indd 182  12/21/06 5:47:30 AM  SACRED SCABBARD Price (Item Level): 4,400 gp (9th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 4th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Several glyphs that promise power over the undead are incised along the length of this plain steel baton.  Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: Full-round (manipulation) Weight: 1/2 lb. This glass canister is filled with a gray salve that seems to be flecked with crushed bits of insects. Upon spreading this salve upon your skin, you gain spell resistance 17 for 5 minutes. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spell resistance. Cost to Create: 675 gp, 54 XP, 2 days.  SCEPTER OF THE NETHERWORLD Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 3 lb.  SCROLLS OF UNCERTAIN PROVENANCE [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: — or — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) necromancy Activation: — or 1 hour; see text Weight: 5 lb.  Scrolls of uncertain provenance  This bundle of rough parchment contains scraps of varying shapes and sizes; some appear old and others new. It is bound with a braided cord and secured with a medallion bearing the holy symbol of Wee Jas. Scrolls of uncertain provenance are not spells stored in written form, but collections of death-obsessed writings in an unknown hand. Popular myth holds that those who can command the lore contained in a set of these scrolls have power over life and death. As long as you possess scrolls of uncertain provenance, you gain a +5 competence bonus on Knowledge checks, provided that you are lawful neutral, lawful evil, lawful good, or neutral. Relic Power: If you have established a proper divine connection, you can attempt to read from the scrolls once per day for 1 hour. Understanding their lore, however, is not an easy task. To begin with, the scrolls are written in nearly every language, ancient and modern, and the text sometimes switches languages  TOOLS  SALVE OF MINOR SPELL RESISTANCE  Sacred scabbard  Benefit Renewal pact for yourself Renewal pact for another Death pact for yourself Death pact for another True resurrection for another (and the scrolls disappear)  If your check is successful, you gain temporary understanding of one of the scrolls’ secrets depending on how long you have spent reading them. Your hours of successful reading stack for this purpose, so you can read over multiple days to gain a greater benefit, if desired. The time spent need not all be spent at once; you can divide it as you choose for the purpose of gaining benefits. Reading scrolls of uncertain provenance is not without risk, since delving into their mysteries draws you near to the border between life and death. Whenever you spend an hour reading scrolls of uncertain provenance, you must roll on the following table, whether or not you learn anything useful. d% 01–10 11–30  31–60 61–90 91–100  Illus. by J. Zhang & J. Thomas  A sacred scabbard can change shape to fit any dagger, sword, or axe touched to it, even making allowances for double weapons. The scabbard keeps any weapon carried in it clean and sharp. Furthermore, three times per day, you can command it to produce a bless weapon effect on the weapon it holds as you draw it. This effect lasts for 10 rounds. A sacred scabbard functions only for good-aligned characters. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bless weapon. Cost to Create: 2,200 gp, 176 XP, 5 days.  Time 1 hour 2 hours 3 hours 4 hours 6 hours  CHAPTER 4  This hardened leather scabbard is inscribed with pictograms depicting many different kinds of weapons.  If you can turn or rebuke undead, holding a scepter of the netherworld allows you to do so as if your level in the relevant class were three levels higher. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, turn or rebuke undead. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  within the same sentence. Thus, a successful hour of reading requires a successful DC 20 Knowledge (religion) check. You receive a +2 bonus on the check for every language you speak. So cryptic are the scrolls that even read magic, comprehend languages, or other spells don’t help you understand them, nor does the Decipher Script skill.  Effect Go insane (as the insanity spell); Will DC 20 negates. The scrolls bestow a permanent curse upon you, applying a –4 penalty on attack rolls, saves, ability checks, and skill checks; Will DC 20 negates. Receive a geas/quest to perform for Wee Jas; Will DC 20 negates. Gain 1d6 negative levels (Fort DC 20 removes them after 24 hours). Become a ghost for a year and a day; Fort DC 20 negates.  To use the relic power, you must worship Wee Jas and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD.  183  620_10762_Chp4.indd 183  12/21/06 5:47:32 AM  CHAPTER 4  Shackles of silence  TOOLS  Sending stones Scrying shard  Lens of the desert  Illus. by E. Widermann  Eternal wand  Lore: Scrolls of uncertain provenance have long been associated with Wee Jas, although even her lorekeepers don’t know where the first ones came from (Knowledge [religion] DC 15). In fact, they were penned by beings that lost their sanity in the pursuit of arcane knowledge and collected by agents of Wee Jas for the sake of the knowledge they contain (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, death pact (SC 60), renewal pact (SC 173), true resurrection. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  SCRYING BEACON Price (Item Level): 750 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: —; see text Weight: — This button-sized, black half-sphere appears to be made of ebony or jet. If you spend 1 minute attuning yourself to a scrying beacon, you can choose for the next clairaudience/clairvoyance spell you cast to be centered on the beacon, as long as you are within 1 mile of it. Once this power has been used, the beacon becomes dormant until you attune yourself to it again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairaudience/clairvoyance. Cost to Create: 375 gp, 30 XP, 1 day.  SCRYING SHARD Price (Item Level): 1,350 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) divination Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. Ever-shifting, deep red swirls writhe within this fist-sized pink crystal. A character of any class can cast scrying using a scrying shard as a focus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, scrying. Cost to Create: 675 gp, 54 XP, 2 days.  SENDING STONES Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Standard Weight: 1 lb. These fist-sized chunks of unworked stone are mirror images of one another. These unremarkable-looking stones come in pairs. Once per day, the bearer of each stone can send a message (as the sending spell) to the bearer of the other stone. If a stone’s mate is not in a creature’s possession, no message is sent and you know the communication has failed. If either  stone of the pair is destroyed, the other becomes useless. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, sending. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  SHACKLES OF SILENCE Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: —; see text Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) illusion Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. These iron manacles look old, slightly rusted, and heavily dented. Shackles of silence fit any Small, Medium, or Large creature. A creature manacled with these shackles is affected by a silence effect (as the spell) that fills that creature’s space. A creature can slip free from shackles of silence with a successful DC 28 Escape Artist check, or break free with a successful DC 28 Strength check. However, if the creature bound by shackles of silence escapes by breaking them or using Escape Artist, the silence effect ends and the shackles ring for 1 round, as an alarm spell’s audible alarm. Broken shackles of silence lose their power after sounding this alarm, becoming nonmagical and useless. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, alarm, silence. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  184  620_10762_Chp4.indd 184  12/21/06 5:47:35 AM  SHARD OF THE SUN [RELIC] Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) evocation Activation: — or standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  This tiny fragment of cast-off crystal glows with a minuscule bit of power.  SLASHING SAND Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: — A handful of thick, glassy black sand fills this small lizardskin sack.  Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1/2 lb. This twisted wooden spike was carved from the misshapen limb of an ash tree. A sleeping spike becomes invisible 1 round after you plant it firmly in the ground. Thereafter, as soon as any creature comes within 10 feet of it, the spike emits a sleep effect (Will DC 17 negates) in a 20-footradius burst that affects all creatures with 10 Hit Dice or fewer. The spike is destroyed when the sleep effect is triggered. During the round that a sleeping spike remains visible after being planted, any creature can safely remove it from the ground (a standard action) to render it harmless and ready for reuse. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, symbol of sleep. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  SOUL ANCHOR Price (Item Level): 10,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. Thin iron bands twine around jagged fragments of jet-black obsidian to form the haft of this cruel-looking rod. When you activate a soul anchor, each creature adjacent to you must succeed on a DC 18 Will saving throw or be unable to move from its current space for 1 round. Creatures that are flying or sinking when the spell takes effect are magically held in place. However, affected creatures are neither paralyzed nor entangled, so they can fight and cast spells normally. Shard of the sun  620_10762_Chp4.indd 185  SLEEPING SPIKE  TOOLS  When held, a skill shard telepathically whispers its command word into your mind. When you activate it, you gain a competence bonus on your next check with a specific skill, chosen during the item’s creation. The check must begin before the end of your turn and must be completed within 10 minutes. A skill shard disintegrates when used. Normal: +2 competence bonus. Greater: +5 competence bonus. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, specified skill 2 ranks (lesser) or 5 ranks (greater). Cost to Create: 25 gp, 1 XP, 1 day (lesser); 150 gp, 6 XP, 1 day (greater).  Illus. by B. Hagan  A shard of the sun is mentioned in several religious texts as “Pelor’s gift, which I carry into darkness—a sun that never sets.” When you hold this item, it continuously emits a warm light equivalent to a daylight spell heightened to 5th level, provided that you are neutral good, lawful good, chaotic good, or neutral. The symbol must be covered completely to douse its light. Relic Power: If you have established the proper divine connection, you can command a shard of the sun to fire two simultaneous searing light spells, though each must be aimed at a different target. Each beam deals 10d6 points of damage to undead, 5d6 points to constructs and objects, and 5d8 points of damage to other creatures. Creatures particularly vulnerable to bright light, such as vampires, take 10d8 points of damage from these beams. This ability functions three times per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Pelor and either sacrifice a 6th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 11 HD. If you sacrifice an 8th-level spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 15 HD, you can fire four searing light beams with each activation (no two at the same target). Lore: The first shards of the sun were hewn by Pelor himself from the orb of the sun and molded into the shape of his symbol. Over the centuries, he gifted them to his most favored high priests, and most of them remain in the hands of his clergy today (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, daylight, searing light. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  Price (Item Level): 50 gp (1/2) (normal); 300 gp (2nd) (greater) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: —  When you fling slashing sand onto the ground, it covers an area of up to four contiguous squares with razor-sharp obsidian shards for 1 hour (the equivalent of a spike stones spell). At least one affected square must be adjacent to your space. Once activated, this item is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, spike stones. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  CHAPTER 4  This brightly glowing holy symbol of Pelor is made of hammered gold and set with small diamonds.  SKILL SHARD  185  12/21/06 5:47:40 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  The power of a soul anchor prevents all voluntary movement that would allow the affected creatures to leave their respective spaces (including teleportation magic or other spells and items that allow movement). However, it does not preclude involuntary movement, such as that resulting from a bull rush. If an affected creature is involuntarily moved out of its space for any reason, the effect on that creature ends immediately. This ability functions five times per day, but it can’t be activated in consecutive rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Rod, hold monster. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp, 400 XP, 10 days.  SOULVOID ORB Price (Item Level): 700 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb. This black, fist-sized orb feels faintly greasy to the touch. When you throw a soulvoid orb against a hard surface, it explodes in a shower of orange sparks that fills a 10-foot-radius burst. Each creature within that area is affected as if by a divest essentia spell (MoI 101). Lore: Soulvoid orbs were first created by the githyanki for use in a struggle with a splinter group of githzerai who had taken up the practice of meldshaping (Knowledge [the planes] DC 15). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, divest essentia. Cost to Create: 350 gp, 28 XP, 1 day.  SPHERE OF AWAKENING Price (Item Level): 1,800 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This fist-sized sphere of crystal is perfectly clear. A sphere of awakening allows you to silently rouse your allies from slumber, even if magically created. When you activate the sphere, all allies in a 60-footradius burst are immediately awakened  from sleep (whether mundane or magical in origin). In addition, any fatigue or exhaustion affecting you and those allies immediately ends. Furthermore, you and all affected allies gain immunity to fatigue, exhaustion, and sleep effects for 10 minutes after the sphere is activated. A sphere of awakening functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, break enchantment. Cost to Create: 900 gp, 72 XP, 2 days.  SPIDER ROD Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) necromancy Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 3 lb. A complex relief of webs and tiny arachnids covers this silvery rod. Its surface is strangely sticky to the touch. A spider rod has two different abilities that each function three times per day. Silk Strand: The rod produces an entangling strand of silk as a ranged touch attack (range 100 feet). A target hit by this strand is entangled for 1 minute (Reflex DC 20 negates entanglement, but the creature’s speed is still halved for the duration of the effect). Treat this as a net attack, except that the strand has 15 hit points and takes double damage from fire. Poison Touch: You can make a melee touch attack with the rod to deliver a virulent contact poison (Fort DC 16, 1d6 Con/1d6 Con). Prerequisites: Craft Rod, poison, web. Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  SPOOL OF ENDLESS ROPE Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This spool of silk rope comes with a belt loop so that it can be hung conveniently at the user’s side.  To use a spool of endless rope, you feed out as little or as much rope as desired, up to a maximum of 500 feet at any one time. When you are finished with the rope, you can simply wind it back onto the spool. (Feeding out or rewinding requires 1 fullround action per 50 feet of rope.) The rope can’t be entirely separated from the spool, though it can be cut or broken like a normal silk rope. Any portion of rope cut away from the spool disappears instantly. Rope from a spool of endless rope can be spliced or knotted together with another rope (including one from a second spool of endless rope), but it can’t be wound back into the spool while so attached. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Leomund’s secret chest. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  STENCH STONE Price (Item Level): 300 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held); see text Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Standard (thrown) or — (ammunition) Weight: — This stone reeks of rotting meat. A stench stone nauseates its target and sickens those nearby. The stone must be thrown (range increment 10 feet) or hurled from a sling (using that weapon’s normal range increment) as a ranged attack. If the stone strikes its target, it deals no damage but bursts into a cloud of noxious vapor. If a stench stone misses its target, it is consumed without effect. Any living creature struck by a stench stone becomes nauseated for 1 round (Fort DC 13 negates). Regardless of the success or failure of the save, the target exudes a stench for 3 rounds that causes all creatures within 10 feet of it to be sickened for the remaining duration of the stench (Fort DC 13 negates). Creatures immune to poison are unaffected by stench stones; any effect that neutralizes or delays poison also protects against the effect. Once activated, this item is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ghoul touch. Cost to Create: 150 gp, 12 XP, 1 day.  A spool of endless rope holds an unlimited amount of the finest silk rope.  186  620_10762_Chp4.indd 186  12/21/06 5:47:43 AM  This bronze spike sparks with static electricity.  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  A stunning spike becomes invisible 1 round after you plant it firmly in the ground. Thereafter, as soon as any creature comes within 10 feet of it, the spike bursts into fragments, stunning all creatures in a 20-foot radius for 1 round (Will DC 20 negates). This effect destroys the spike. During the round that a stunning spike remains visible after being planted, any creature can safely remove it from the ground (a standard action) to render it harmless and ready for reuse. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, symbol of stunning. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  SUMMONER’S TOTEM  Stench stone  STRAND OF LIGHTNING  Price (Item Level): 10,700 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) conjuration Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 4,350 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb.  Seven green pearls stud this silver chain. One is large, and the others are in three progressively smaller pairs. The stones slosh as though filled with liquid.  Seven coils of brightly polished copper wire dangle from this strand of interwoven silver and copper threads.  Each of the seven pearls on this chain can be detached and thrown up to 50 feet. When a pearl strikes its destination, it explodes into a 20-foot-radius, 20foot-high, cylinder-shaped cloud of acid centered on the end point. This cloud deals acid damage to any creature in the area (Reflex DC 19 half). A strand of acid pearls has four different sizes of pearls, each of which deals a different amount of acid damage. The two smallest each deal 3d6 points of damage, each of the next larger pair deals 5d6 points of damage, each of the next larger pair deals 7d6 points of damage, and the largest pearl deals 9d6 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, acid storm (SC 7). Cost to Create: 5,350 gp, 428 XP, 11 days.  Each of the seven coils on this chain can be detached and thrown. When thrown, a coil explodes into a 30-foot line of lightning originating from you. Each creature in the area takes electricity damage based on the size of the coil (Reflex DC 14 half). Each of the four smallest coils deals 3d6 points of damage. The next larger two each deal 5d6 damage, and the largest coil deals 7d6 points of damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, lightning bolt. Cost to Create: 2,175 gp, 174 XP, 5 days.  STUNNING SPIKE Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) enchantment Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 1/2 lb.  This crudely carved, foot-long wooden rod bears a vaguely animal visage at its head. A boon for those who magically conjure animals to aid them in combat, a summoner’s totem allows instantaneous enhancement of your summoned allies. When you summon a single animal using a summon nature’s ally spell, you can cast another spell targeting the summoned creature as a swift action. The second spell must be no higher than 3rd level, it must target the summoned creature (and only the summoned creature), its casting time must be no longer than 1 standard action, and it expends the spell or spell slot as normal. For example, immediately after summoning a brown bear with summon nature’s ally IV, you could cast bull’s strength upon that bear as a swift action (as long as you were adjacent to the bear). You couldn’t use the totem to cast obscuring mist (since that spell doesn’t target the bear). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, speak with animals, summon nature’s ally II. Cost to Create: 1,550 gp, 124 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by J. Thomas  STRAND OF ACID PEARLS  Price (Item Level): 3,100 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: —; see text Weight: 2 lb.  SURVIVAL POUCH Price (Item Level): 3,300 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Standard (manipulation) Weight: 5 lb.  187  620_10762_Chp4.indd 187  12/21/06 5:47:44 AM  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  This pouch looks like it’s seen its share of rough use. It is tattered and stained from use in the wild. Five times per day, you can reach into a survival pouch and retrieve your choice of one of the following items. You can draw out the same item five times in one day, draw out five different items, or produce any combination of up to five items. Each item lasts for 8 hours or until indicated below, whichever comes first. • Trail rations for one Medium creature for one day. • Two gallons of water stored in a waterskin. The waterskin disappears if it is emptied completely. • A tent and two bedrolls sized for Medium creatures. • A 50-foot coil of hempen rope. • A shovel. • A campfire (about 2 feet square). The fire can be left to burn, or it can be pulled apart to produce eight lit torches. Each removed torch lasts for 1 hour and reduces the remaining burning time of the campfire by 1 hour. If the fire is extinguished, the unburnt portion vanishes. • A composite shortbow (+1 Str bonus) and a quiver of 20 arrows. The bow disappears 1 round after the last arrow has been drawn from the quiver. • A mule with bit, bridle, saddle, and saddlebags (treat as a summoned creature, except that it will not fight for you). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, major creation. Cost to Create: 1,650 gp, 132 XP, 4 days.  TALISMAN OF THE DISK Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — This convex lens of crystal dangles from a chain carved from blue glass. Activating a talisman of the disk creates a Tenser’s floating disk (PH 294). The disk can hold 300 pounds and lasts for up to 3 hours (or until dismissed with another standard action). The disk’s maximum range from you is 30 feet. If you are also wearing a magic item that provides an enhancement bonus to Strength, the disk’s carrying capacity  increases by 100 pounds per point of bonus granted by the item. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bull’s strength, Tenser’s floating disk. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  TALISMAN OF UNDEAD MASTERY Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) necromancy Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: — This tarnished silver skull fits comfortably in a human hand. A talisman of undead mastery benefits any character capable of either turning or rebuking undead. The talisman has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges increases your effective cleric level for the purpose of a single turn or rebuke undead check, which must be made before the end of your turn. 1 charge: Increase effective turning level by 2. 2 charges: Increase effective turning level by 3. 3 charges: Increase effective turning level by 4. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, command undead. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  TALISMAN OF UNDYING FORTITUDE Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 15th Aura: Strong; (DC 22) necromancy Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This plum-sized skull carved from silver is tarnished black. A talisman of undying fortitude allows you to take on some of the physical qualities of undead. When you activate the talisman, you gain immunity to poison, sleep effects, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, critical hits, nonlethal damage, physical ability damage, ability drain, energy drain, fatigue, exhaustion, death from massive damage, and any effect that requires a Fortitude save. Also, you do not need to breathe. This effect lasts for 3 rounds.  A talisman of undying fortitude functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, veil of undeath (SC 229). Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  TANGLEPATCH Price (Item Level): 200 gp (2nd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: Standard (thrown) Weight: 1 lb. Vines, creeping ivy, and gnarled roots knot together to form this dense tangle of vegetation. To use a tanglepatch, you must throw it (it can be thrown up to 50 feet). When it lands, it creates an entangle effect (as the spell) centered on the point of impact, with a duration of 5 rounds. Once activated, a tanglepatch is expended and cannot be used again. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, entangle. Cost to Create: 100 gp, 8 XP, 1 day.  THORN POUCH Price (Item Level): 4,400 (9th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: Swift (manipulation) Weight: 1 lb. This greenish sack is sticky with sap. A thorn pouch allows you to bring forth several types of magical plant effects for offensive and defensive purposes. A pouch has 5 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges when you place your hand within the bag allows you to draw forth a single thorn that has one of the following effects (each as the spell of the same name, but with a duration of 9 rounds): 1 charge: Entangle. 3 charges: Spike growth. 5 charges: Wall of thorns. To use a thorn after drawing it forth, you drop it into your own space or any adjacent square (a free action). After 1 round, the thorn produces the desired effect. If you don’t drop a thorn within 1 round after drawing it, it disappears with no effect. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, entangle, spike growth, wall of thorns. Cost to Create: 2,200 gp, 176 XP, 5 days.  188  620_10762_Chp4.indd 188  12/21/06 5:47:48 AM  casting dragons, and powerful wizards (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, secret page. Cost to Create: 2,750 gp, 220 XP, 6 days.  TOME OF THE STILLED TONGUE [RELIC]  TOOLS  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 7,500 gp (11th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: See text Weight: 5 lb. This thick, leather-bound manuscript has a particularly disgusting decoration—a desiccated tongue nailed to its front cover.  Tome of ancient lore  Price (Item Level): 5,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 20th Aura: Strong; (DC 25) transmutation Activation: 1 hour; see text Weight: 2 lb. This ancient, leather-bound book is stuffed to overflowing with yellowing sheets of parchment. A boon to arcane spellcasters of all sorts, a tome of ancient lore contains every conceivable spell. Perusing it for 1 hour gives you a +5 competence bonus on Knowledge (arcana) and Spellcraft checks made that day, provided that you are neutral, neutral good, neutral evil, lawful neutral, or chaotic neutral. The hour spent studying the tome is in addition to any time you spend preparing spells. Relic Power: Though the pages of this book contain all the world’s arcane knowledge, a tome of ancient lore is cursed with a deliberately confusing, ever-changing system of cross-referencing. Because its pages constantly rearrange themselves, apparently at random, finding any useful information by browsing the book is impossible. However, if you have established the proper divine connection, you can use a tome of ancient lore while preparing arcane spells to prepare a single spell that isn’t in your spellbook.  Tome of the stilled tongue  620_10762_Chp4.indd 189  A tome of the stilled tongue is a treasure trove of arcane potential. If you are neutral evil, chaotic evil, lawful evil, or neutral, the book reveals full instructions for creating a lich’s phylactery and offers 500 blank spell pages that function like those in Boccob’s blessed book (DMG 249). Relic Power: A tome of the stilled tongue also contains directions for eldritch mental exercises designed to strengthen your spellcasting. If you have established the proper divine connection and read the appropriate section of the tome (requiring 1 hour of mental exercises), you can increase your effective caster level for all spells by 1 for 24 hours. However, because the exercises are mystically strenuous, doing them reduces your full normal hit point total by 1 per character level while the caster level increase is in effect. This ability functions once per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Vecna and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: The grisly cover decoration on the original tome of the stilled tongue once belonged to a former cleric of Vecna who couldn’t keep her order’s secrets. Now five copies are known to exist, but the origins of the other four tongues have never been revealed (Knowledge [religion] DC 20). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Sanctify Relic, Scribe Scroll, secret page. Cost to Create: 3,750 gp, 300 XP, 8 days.  Illus. by W. England & W. Reynolds  TOME OF ANCIENT LORE [RELIC]  You have a 50% chance of finding any arcane spell of the highest level you can cast, and a 100% chance to find any other spell that you can cast. The book functions in this manner once per day. To use the relic power, you must worship Boccob and either sacrifice a 5th-level divine spell slot or have the True Believer feat and at least 9 HD. Lore: Allegedly penned by Boccob himself and “borrowed” from his library, the original tome disappeared for centuries. Eventually, copies began to appear in the possession of arcane colleges, spell-  189  12/21/06 5:47:50 AM  TOME OF WORLDLY MEMORY  CHAPTER 4  Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) transmutation Activation: 1 minute or 1 standard action; see text Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by B. Hagan  TOOLS  This small book is bound in hammered silver and engraved with the continents of the world.  3 charges: Gain a +8 competence bonus on your caster level check to overcome spell resistance. You can divide the 3 charges between spells, or spend all three to enhance a single spell. For example, you could grant three spells each a +4 bonus, one spell a +6 bonus and another a +4 bonus, or a single spell a +8 bonus. No spellbook can have more than one of these items affi xed to it, and you can’t gain benefits from more than one eye in a given day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ability to prepare 3rd-level arcane spells. Cost to Create: 3,500 gp, 280 XP, 7 days.  A tome of worldly memory allows you to call upon the secret memories of the world to aid you in unlocking forgotTome of ten knowledge. By studying the worldly memory book for 1 minute, you gain a +5 competence bonus on a single Knowledge check. The tome functions three times per day. If you have at least 5 ranks in the Knowledge skill in question, you need Glyph only peruse the book as a stanseal dard action to gain its benefit. Greater Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous glyph seal Item, fox’s cunning. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  TOMEBOUND EYE OF BOCCOB Price (Item Level): 7,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Standard (command) Weight: — The watchful Eye of the Uncaring One stares out from this seal. When affi xed to a wizard’s spellbook, this seal provides a focus for arcane energy. A tomebound eye of Boccob has 3 charges, which are renewed each day at dawn. Spending 1 or more charges when you prepare your wizard spells from a spellbook to which a tomebound eye is attached grants one or more spells a competence bonus on caster level checks to overcome a target’s spell resistance. 1 charge: Gain a +4 competence bonus on your caster level check to overcome spell resistance. 2 charges: Gain a +6 competence bonus on your caster level check to overcome spell resistance.  This lantern is elaborately crafted from flametouched iron, burnished to a silvery hue. A continuous, translucent white flame flickers within, though it sheds no heat.  A truelight lantern continually emanates bright light as a continual flame spell. Its true power can be activated by speaking the word “reveal” in Celestial. Once it is activated, a truelight lantern provides bright illumination in a 60-foot cone and shadowy illumination for another 60 feet beyond that. Everything within the 60-foot cone of bright illumination can be seen as if all viewers were under the effect of a true seeing spell. This effect lasts for 10 minutes. A truelight lantern can normally be activated once per day, but can be Tomebound eye activated additional times if a true of Boccob seeing spell is cast into it (overriding the normal targeting restriction of the spell). Each casting of true seeing allows a lantern to be activated one more time per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, true seeing. Cost to Create: 18,000 gp, 1,440 XP, 36 days.  TROLL GUT ROPE Price (Item Level): 500 gp (3rd) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 7 lb. One end of this pile of pungent-smelling intestines has been tied with an intricate knot. Once per day, you can command this 50foot rope to grow up to 350 feet in length. Any length beyond the original 50 feet decays to nothingness after 12 hours. If the large knot on one end is ever untied or cut open, the rope’s magic is destroyed. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, minor creation. Cost to Create: 250 gp, 20 XP, 1 day.  WILDING CLASP Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: — Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This 3-inch-long gold chain has a clasp on each end. A wilding clasp can be attached to any item worn on the body. When so worn, a clasp prevents the worn item from melding into your new form when you use wild shape (as long as the item could reasonably be worn by the new form). Thus, the item remains fully functional and can be used normally in your new form. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, wild shape. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  TRUELIGHT LANTERN Price (Item Level): 36,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) divination Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 3 lb.  190  620_10762_Chp4.indd 190  12/21/06 5:47:55 AM  Illus. by A. Swekel  magic item set consists of three to six thematically linked magic items that provide extra bonuses or effects when worn together. The abilities scale or accumulate with the number of items worn. A character gains a particularly potent effect when all the items of a set are worn or used together.  ARMOR OF THE WATCHING MASTER  Those who wear the armor of the watching master know what it feels like to be in command and to sense what others miss. They possess unnatural sight and unusual powers to blind, burn, and bully their enemies. Individually, each piece of the armor of the watching master provides a useful ability, but only those with the full set know its true powers. The armor of the watching master works best in the hands of a barbarian or other melee warrior. As medium armor, a breastplate of terror allows a barbarian to use his fast movement ability, and its damage reduction stacks with the barbarian’s. The armor of the watching master also provides other advantages useful to any melee-oriented character, such as frightening or blinding foes, ignoring hardness, and overcoming damage reduction. Note that the Strength bonus provided by the armor of the watching master can be increased using the rules in Chapter 6.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana) or Knowledge (the planes), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the armor of the watching master to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The first set of the armor of the watching master belonged to a powerful elf paladin who returned from planar travel wearing the items. The paladin founded an organization devoted to guardianship and order, and sets of the armor of the watching master became standard issue for the highest-ranking members of that group. The organization, called the Watchful Eyes, collapsed due to internal strife one hundred years ago, and now sets of this armor continue to appear from time to time in the hands of various individuals. DC 20: The Watchful Eyes collapsed because many of its paladin members became blackguards at about the same time that its founder vanished. Lacking leadership and warring internally, the group eventually disintegrated. DC 25: Stories persist that the founder of the organization was the first to fall from grace, and that she returned from the planes tainted by evil. The stories don’t say how she managed to hide this from other members of the  191  620_10762_Chp5.indd 191  12/21/06 5:49:55 AM  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  Watchful Eyes or why she founded the group, but supposedly the dark side of the Watchful Eyes persists as a cultlike order of barbarians and blackguards who wear pieces of the armor of the watching master as a sign of their devotion to the cult. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  COLLECTION BENEFITS Wearing pieces of the armor of the watching master allows you to command or frighten foes, blind and burn enemies, or crush objects that impede your vision. Wearing the entire set grants you vision that can pierce invisibility. When all four pieces of the armor are worn, the staring eyes marking each item appear to come to life, becoming bloodshot, yellow-pupiled orbs that look around of their own accord. 2 Pieces: You gain a +2 bonus on initiative checks. 4 Pieces: You gain a +5 competence bonus on Spot checks. Once per day, you can speak the command word of “Cabiri” and activate the armor with a standard action to gain the effect of a see invisibility spell for 3 minutes.  BREASTPLATE OF TERROR Price (Item Level): 13,200 gp (14th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — and immediate (mental) Weight: 30 lb. This adamantine breastplate bears an emblem of a wide, staring eye surrounded by raised rays of glittering mithral.  Armor of the watching master  As a +1 adamantine breastplate, this item grants damage reduction 2/—. A breastplate of terror’s damage reduction stacks with damage reduction gained as a class feature (but not from any other source). For example, a 10th-level barbarian would have damage reduction 4/—. In addition, once per day immediately after you have been damaged by a melee attack, you can activate this armor to render a foe that just wounded you frightened for 1 round. If the enemy succeeds on a DC 20 Will save, it is shaken for 1 round rather than frightened.  Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, cause fear, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp (plus 10,200 gp for adamantine breastplate), 120 XP, 3 days.  GAUNTLETS OF DESTRUCTION Price (Item Level): 6,610 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation, transmutation  Armor of the Watching Master Pieces and Abilities Piece Mask of mastery Helm of wounding sight Gauntlets of destruction Breastplate of terror  Body Slot Face Head Hands Body  Price (Level) 3,500 gp (8th) 6,500 gp (10th) 6,610 gp (11th) 13,200 gp (14th)  Ability +5 on Intimidate checks; 1/day command Light at will; 3/day blinding fire cone +2 Strength; 3/day treat attack as adamantine +1 adamantine breastplate; 1/day frighten foe  Armor of the Watching Master Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 4 pieces  Benefit +2 on initiative checks +5 on Spot checks; 1/day see invisibility for 3 min.  192  620_10762_Chp5.indd 192  12/21/06 5:49:58 AM  Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 2 lb. Each of these spiked steel gauntlets has an embossed image of an eye on its back. Each eye has an emerald for a pupil.  Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. This steel helmet covers all of the wearer’s head but the face. A single huge eye with a crystal pupil is embossed on the helm’s forehead.  Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb. This steel half-mask covers only the lower face. Over the wearer’s mouth, an emblem depicting a large eye with a crystal for its pupil stares forth. Wearing a mask of mastery causes the wearer’s voice to sound more commanding and authoritative, adding a +5 competence bonus on Intimidate checks. When activated, this mask allows you to utter a command (as the spell; Will DC 20 negates). Unlike the command spell, this effect is not language-dependent—the target needs only to be able to hear you. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, command, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  This striking set of magic items grants you the freedom of the skies and the power to wreak havoc from above. Crafted in honor of their namesake creature, the array of the manticore is tailored for the individual who fights in the air or fights airborne foes, bestowing the ferocity of a manticore and its fearsome sting. Characters focused on making ranged weapon attacks get the most benefit from the array of the manticore. Scouts and rangers see the most benefit, since an airborne scout can skirmish more easily and a ranger’s combat styles prove useful.  CHAPTER 5  HELM OF WOUNDING SIGHT  MASK OF MASTERY  ARRAY OF THE MANTICORE  MAGIC ITEM SETS  Gauntlets of destruction grant you a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength. In addition, you can activate the gauntlets to enable the next melee attack made during your turn to overcome damage reduction and ignore hardness as if the attack were made with an adamantine weapon. This ability functions three times per day. Gauntlets of destruction are masterwork spiked gauntlets and can be used as a weapon. You can enhance a gauntlet beyond its base abilities by using the rules for crafting a magic weapon, but each gauntlet must be enhanced separately. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, bull’s strength, shatter, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 610 gp for two masterwork spiked gauntlets), 240 XP, 6 days.  When a helm of wounding sight is activated, the embossed pupil sheds light with the brightness of a light spell until it is commanded to cease or the helm is removed. In addition, three times per day, a helm of wounding sight can be activated to emit an instantaneous 60-foot-long cone of bright, burning light. This cone deals 2d6 points of fire damage and blinds all creatures in the area for 1 round. Creatures that succeed on DC 20 Reflex saves take half damage and are dazzled for 1 round. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, light, burning hands, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 6 days.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the array of the manticore to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: A hobgoblin sorcerer crafted the first array of the manticore for his favorite bugbear bodyguard. This bugbear rode a tamed manticore into battle, and it seemed fitting to the hobgoblin to reward his servant’s skill and bravery with a tribute to his ferocity. DC 20: A group of humans and halfings attacked the goblinoid stronghold. The goblins were eventually defeated, but only after many of the invaders died from the javelins and spikes cast down upon them from the air. The few survivors divided up the array of the manticore among themselves, not understanding the power the items held when worn together. When one of the halflings inherited a second     BEHIND THE CURTAIN: MAGIC ITEM SETS  The concept of thematically linked sets of magic items that provide more power when used together has a great pedigree in fantasy fiction, but D&D has largely ignored this concept. Magic Item Compendium presents item sets to remedy that. The collection benefits of each set are carefully designed to provide appealing bonus abilities that aren’t unbalancing. The character never pays gold for these extra powers: Their value is not added to the costs of the items in the set. We don’t want a player whose item set components have not yet yielded any additional abilities to feel like he has paid too much for his items. If a character must somehow pay for the ability, collecting the  set feels more like working off a debt than seeking something fun. Instead, the balancing factor of the sets comes from the PC using his item slots for the items of the set instead of items that might be more advantageous. The value of a collection benefit stays within certain boundaries. The collection benefit for two pieces should equal roughly 10% of the combined cost of the two cheapest items in the set. Thereafter, collection benefits are valued at roughly 25% of the cost of the cheapest item or combination of items you need to reach the threshold of gaining the ability. The capstone ability of the set might be as much as 30% of the value of the most expensive item in the set.     193  620_10762_Chp5.indd 193  12/21/06 5:50:02 AM  Illus. by J. Thomas  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  piece from a fallen companion, she discovered the power of feather fall granted by possessing two pieces of the array. When this knowledge spread among the others, infighting broke out, and eventually only two remained. They made a truce, and each parted to investigate the means of creating the missing companion pieces. In this way, use and knowledge of the array spread. DC 25: Although the array of the manticore bears no curse or magic that makes one vulnerable, legend says that the hobgoblin who created the first set also created a spell whereby he could command the movements of the wearer by impelling the items to move, accomplishing a jerky, puppetlike control over a wearer’s body. This spell also prevented the items from being removed. Many have sought the spell or attempted to recreate it, but no one is known to have succeeded. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  Array of the Manticore Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 5 pieces  Benefit Feather fall at will 2/day summon manticore  Each of these fine steel bracers is inlaid with a golden image of a swooping manticore. Bracers of aerial combat grant you a +1 competence bonus on attack rolls if you or the foe you attack is airborne. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, gust of wind, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  GLOVES OF ENDLESS JAVELINS Price (Item Level): 7,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Free (command) Weight: — This pair of black leather gloves is set with golden studs, each embossed with the image of a manticore’s head. With the complete set of this array, you can summon a manticore to serve you  (CL 5th). You can negate or renew this power as a swift (mental) action. 5 Pieces: You can summon a manticore (as if using a summon monster spell) with a swift (mental) action, which fights on your behalf for 5 rounds. The manticore has damage reduction 10/magic and gains a +5 competence bonus on attack rolls. This ability functions two times per day, but summoning a second manticore causes the fi rst to disappear if still present.  COLLECTION BENEFITS BRACERS OF Wearing any two pieces of the array of the manticore grants you freedom from the AERIAL COMBAT threat of falling damage. Wearing the full set allows you to call upon a manticore for aid, bringing it into battle on swift wings to rain death down upon your foes. 2 Pieces: You function as though perpetually affected by a feather fall spell  Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  Gloves of endless javelins allow you to rain death down on your enemies. When you activate these gloves, a +1 javelin made of pure force appears in your hand. A javelin created by the gloves lasts until you resolve an attack with it or until the end of your turn, whichever comes first. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Wondrous Item, magic missile, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,500 gp, 280 XP, 7 days.  HELM OF THE HUNTER Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — or standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This gold and mithral helm looks like the bristle-bearded head of a manticore. A helm of the hunter grants you a +5 competence bonus on Spot checks and the  Array of the Manticore Pieces and Abilities Piece Bracers of aerial combat Gloves of endless javelins Medallion of aerial defense Helm of the hunter Winged vest  Body Slot Arms Hands Throat Head Torso  Price (Level) 5,000 (9th) 7,000 (11th) 8,000 (11th) 9,000 (12th) 12,000 (13th)  Ability +1 attack while you or foe is airborne Create temporary +1 javelin DR 10/magic against ranged attacks if you or foe is airborne +5 Spot; Far Shot; 1/daylow-light vision anddarkvision for 4 hours 5/day fly 60 ft. (good) for 5 rounds  194  620_10762_Chp5.indd 194  12/21/06 5:50:04 AM  benefit of the Far Shot feat. These effects function continuously. When you activate this helm, you gain low-light vision and darkvision out to 60 feet for 4 hours. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairaudience/clairvoyance, darkvision, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  This medallion is composed of a manticore’s head and wings exquisitely crafted in gold and hung from a black leather band. A medallion of aerial defense grants you damage reduction 10/magic against ranged weapons, as long as either you or your attacker is airborne. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, protection from arrows, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  WINGED VEST Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 2 lb. This black leather vest is decorated with fine black scales and has a pair of dragonlike wings folded against its back When you activate a winged vest, it unfolds its manticore wings and allows you to fly at a speed of 60 feet (good maneuverability) for 5 rounds. A winged vest functions five times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fly, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (nobility and royalty), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the five virtues to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: In an age now past, an order of knights was chartered to defend against illithid incursions. For hundreds of years, the knights fought against all manner of infiltration, control, and even attempts at invading small border kingdoms. Through it all, the knights prevailed, relying on their code to give them strength and resolve. This code was a manifestation of five virtues upon which the order was founded. Those virtues came to be embodied in a special set of magic items called, appropriately enough, the five virtues. The items exemplified honor, freedom, valor, vigilance, and sacrifice. DC 20: The knightly order is long gone, and even its name is lost to history. However, archivists have studied relics found in the ancient ruins of their stronghold. Through knowledge gained thereby, they learned about the lost virtues of the knights. Archivists suspect, based on clues unearthed in their delvings, that some or all of the five virtues might yet be found in far-separated keeps, or perhaps in isolated treasures of long-lived subterranean monsters. DC 25: Recently, a group of miners opened a new face on a coal seam they had found long ago. Almost immediately they broke into a cavity long sealed from the surface. The cavity contained a warm, salty lake in which eyeless, albino, manylegged creatures swam. Unable to plumb the lake’s depth, the miners did find an ancient ruin on the lake’s edge—some sort of fortress, calcified under years of  COLLECTION BENEFITS The wearer of the five virtues gains benefits that aid his ability to fight honorably and help his allies. When you wear two pieces of the set, your eyes shine and sparkle with bravery. When you wear all five virtues and activate the power of the shield of vigor, the virtues take on a silvery sheen as if lit from a plane where valor and virtue rule supreme. 2 Pieces: You gain a +1 morale bonus on Will saves. 5 Pieces: Adjacent allies gain a +1 bonus to AC.  CHAPTER 5  Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: — Weight: —  Whether brave or meek, you will wake to valor when girded with the five virtues, legendary implements of courage brandished by knights of a previous age. When the five virtues are worn in part or in whole, bold heroism blazes within your chest. These five items were created to help knights uphold their values. The abilities granted by the set bolster various abilities of that class (PH2 24), but the items are also useful for warriors of other disciplines.  dripstone. In it they found some barely preserved records of the knightly order. The incomplete records claimed a dead mind flayer community lay sealed beneath the lake, and within that carcass of ancient evil lay one or more pieces of the five virtues stolen from the knights. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  MEDALLION OF AERIAL DEFENSE  FIVE VIRTUES  ARMBAND OF CONFRONTATION Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — Weight: — This bright red band is worn around the bicep. While wearing an armband of confrontation, your fighting challenge (PH2 25) lasts an extra 3 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, divine favor, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  CRYSTAL OF ALACRITY Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: — (armor crystal) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This small crystal bears a carved relief of an armored knight.  195  620_10762_Chp5.indd 195  12/21/06 5:50:07 AM  Five Virtues Pieces and Abilities Piece Armband of confrontation Standard of valor Medal of steadfast honor Crystal of alacrity Shield of vigor  Body Slot Arms Shoulders Throat — (armor — (held)  Price (Level) 1,400 gp (4th) 1,400 gp (5th) 1,500 gp (5th) 3,500 gp (8th) 6,170 gp (10th)  Ability Fighting challenge lasts 3 extra rounds Grant ally extra save against fear effect Immediately stand if knocked prone +5 ft. speed crystal) +1 heavy shield grants fast healing 5 for 3 rounds  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  Five Virtues Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 5 pieces  Benefit +1 on Will saves Adjacent allies gain +1 AC  When attached to medium or heavy armor, this lesser augment crystal (see page 221 for details) grants you a +5-foot morale bonus to your land speed. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, longstrider, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  MEDAL OF STEADFAST HONOR Price (Item Level): 1,500 gp (5th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  196  620_10762_Chp5.indd 196  This heavy gold medal is engraved with a griffon about to take flight. If you are knocked prone, you can activate a medal of steadfast honor to instantly regain your feet in the space where you were standing. A medal functions once per day, but if you have the knight’s challenge class feature (PH2 25), you can activate the medal again by expending a daily use of that ability. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, feather fall, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 750 gp, 60 XP, 2 days.  SHIELD OF VIGOR Price (Item Level): 6,170 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) conjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 15 lb. This solid shield is lacquered in white with an image of a gold dragon at the center. A single red tear falls from the dragon’s left eye. This +1 heavy steel shield rewards you for your unwavering loyalty and self-sacrifice. When you activate the shield, you gain fast healing 5 for 3 rounds.  Five virtues  12/21/06 5:50:09 AM  A shield of vigor functions once per day, but if you have the knight’s challenge class feature (PH2 25), you can activate the shield again by expending a daily use of that ability. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, vigor (SC 229), possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 170 for masterwork heavy steel shield), 240 XP, 6 days.  This magnificent standard is emblazoned with the image of a red griffon. This magic banner is part of a wide mantle you can wear attached to your shoulders. The standard can also be affi xed to a pole, spear, or polearm, thus freeing up your shoulders slot but requiring you to wield the weapon to which it is attached in order to gain the item’s benefit. The standard enhances your ability to inspire your allies on the battlefield. When you activate a standard of valor, you can grant one ally within 60 feet another save against a fear effect currently affecting him or about to affect him. A standard of valor functions once per day, but if you have the knight’s challenge class feature (PH2 25) or the marshal’s grant move action class feature (MH 13), you can activate the standard of valor again by expending a daily use of one of those abilities. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, remove fear, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the fleet warrior’s array to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The fleet warrior’s array was created by an elf kingdom for a legion of warriors chosen for their speed and endurance. Called the Green Runners, these warriors received special training that built upon their talents. They were noted for tirelessly running long distances and for acting as expert scouts and commandos. The Green Runners were the kingdom’s elite fighting force, and bands of Green Runners were occasionally sent to aid the kingdom’s allies.  CHAPTER 5  Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Shoulders; see text Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) abjuration Activation: Immediate (command) Weight: 4 lb.  The fleet warrior’s array is a work of art, both in craftsmanship and magic. Apart, the items prove a great boon, but together they make their wearer as swift as the wind and just as elusive. The items in this set enable the elf warriors it was designed for to move exceptionally quickly, as well as to fight effectively under any conditions and in all types of terrain. While wearing this set, these warriors were almost impossible to capture or even slow down. The fleet warrior’s array should appeal to virtually any character, though spellcasters get less benefit from bracers of blinding strike than adventurers who focus on weapon attacks. Rogues and other stealthy characters in particular should consider the fleet warrior’s array. Gaining an extra sneak attack while flanking can be critical, and the benefits to mobility provided by the array allow a rogue to focus less on skills such as Tumble and Escape Artist, and instead invest in other useful skills.  The warriors received pieces of the fleet warrior’s array as an indication of rank. The highest-ranking members owned all three and were elevated out of the ranks of the legion to serve as an elite cadre of Green Runner guards for the royal family. Each of the elves in this group effectively held the rank of general and acted as an advisor to the king and queen, a position to which every Green Runner could aspire. Tales of the Green Runners have traveled widely, and in many of the lands surrounding their former kingdom, elves and half-elves tell tales of their bravery and prowess. An elf or half-elf wearing an item from the fleet warrior’s array is often mistaken for one of the Green Runners by those who know the stories. DC 20: When the elf kingdom was conquered by its enemies, the Green Runner generals went into hiding, taking with them the pregnant queen and the last hope of preserving the dynasty. They vanished into the depths of a huge and ancient forest, and efforts to locate their hideout proved futile. When the Green Runners fled into the forest with the elf queen they split into many small groups to confuse their pursuers. The group that guarded the queen never rejoined the rest, and now the Green Runners who remain search for clues to what happened to their leader and her child. If the queen gave birth, the royal heir would now be an adult, perhaps ignorant of his or her heritage. DC 25: Some say that the Green Runner generals were traitors to the elf kingdom, and they kidnapped the queen for some personal gain. Those who tell these tales blame the fall of the empire on the generals, because the king lacked his best fighters and advisors when the kingdom was attacked and was forced to divide his attention between two foes. That the Green Runners now seek the queen and her child there can be no doubt, but whether the Green Runners who seek them are the generals or those from the rank and file, none can say.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  STANDARD OF VALOR  FLEET WARRIOR’S ARRAY  Fleet Warrior’s Array Pieces and Abilities Body Piece Bracers of blinding strike Sandals of the light step  Slot Arms Feet  Price (Level) 5,000 gp (9th) 9,000 gp (12th)  Vest of free movement  Torso  12,000 gp (13th)  Ability +2 initiative; 3/day extra attack with full attack +10 speed; pass without trace; not slowed by difficult terrain; 1/day water walk 3/day freedom of movement for 3 rounds  Fleet Warrior’s Array Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces  Benefit +2 AC against attacks of opportunity Dimension door 1/day  197  620_10762_Chp5.indd 197  12/21/06 5:50:14 AM  DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  COLLECTION BENEFITS Parts of the fleet warrior’s array give their wearer the ability to dance in and out of melee with impunity, and wearing the whole set allows the wearer to instantaneously travel to a nearby location and take others along. When someone wears the entire set, the mithral parts of the items turn into glowing emeralds that briefly leave a trail of green light in the air as the wearer moves. 2 Pieces: You gain a +2 dodge bonus to AC against attacks of opportunity. 3 Pieces: You can use dimension door (CL 7th) as a standard (command) action once per day.  Illus. by W. England  BRACERS OF BLINDING STRIKE Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — and swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. This pair of elegant bracers is crafted from green leather with mithral tracery that looks like vines. Tiny, leaf-shaped plates of silver branch off the mithral to create a glimmering pattern. These bracers grant you a +2 competence bonus on initiative checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate bracers of blinding strike, you can make one additional attack with any weapon you are holding, as long as you have already used the full attack action during the turn. This attack is made at your full base attack bonus, plus any modifiers appropriate to the situation. This effect is not cumulative with any other effect that grants you an extra attack when making a full attack, such as the Rapid Shot feat, a speed weapon, or the haste spell. This ability can be used three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, haste, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  SANDALS OF THE LIGHT STEP Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. These exquisite sandals are made of mithral and green leather, and they bear intricate overlapping pieces of leather crafted to look like leaves. Wearing a pair of sandals of the light step provides you with a +10-foot enhancement bonus to your base land speed, and you can ignore any extra movement costs for difficult terrain (PH 148). You also leave no tracks, as if affected by pass without trace. When you activate these sandals, you gain the benefit of a water walk spell for 60 minutes. You can share this effect with up to five allies adjacent to you when you activate the sandals, though doing this reduces the overall duration accordingly. For example, if you share the effect with one other person, the duration is 30 minutes apiece; if you share it with 5 other people, the duration is 10 minutes apiece. This ability functions once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, longstrider, pass without trace, water walk, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  VEST OF FREE MOVEMENT  GARB OF THE HUNTING CAT  Although made of mere steel and skin, the garb of the hunting cat presents a powerful combination of abilities that makes any wearer a deadly predator. This garb gives you the rending claws, incredible stealth, and hunting ability of a tiger. While anyone can wear the garb and become like the beast, only the most skilled combatants can use the abilities of the garb of the hunting cat to their fullest. Characters of any melee-oriented class can find the garb of the hunting cat useful, but the set provides benefits most suited to rangers, rogues, ninjas, and scouts. Feats that help you capitalize on the set’s abilities include Spring Attack and TwoWeapon Fighting.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the garb of the hunting cat to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The garb of the hunting cat first came to light due to a number of shocking attacks upon human and elf settlements. The countryside was terrorized by strange, tigerlike people who would slaughter whole villages. The creatures were difficult to track and, when overmatched, vanished into thin air. When at last one  Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: Swift (command) Weight: — This forest green vest is set with fine mithral studs. Whorls of silver thread create vinelike designs that crawl over its surface. When activated, a vest of freedom grants you freedom of movement (as the spell) for 3 rounds. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of movement, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days. Claw gloves  198  620_10762_Chp5.indd 198  12/21/06 5:50:16 AM  was killed, the victors discovered not a monster but a man wearing the garb of the hunting cat. DC 20: Those who attacked the elves and humans were members of a cult of rakshasa worshipers. Each of the cultists was outfitted with a set of the garb of the hunting cat, and participating in a “hunt” against other humanoids was a necessary part of the rite of passage to receive a set. Most of the sets ended up in the hands of those who survived cultist assaults and were later sold.Many who now wear parts of the garb of the hunting cat are ignorant of the set’s bloody history. DC 25: The raksasha at the center of the cult was confronted, but it escaped and might still be alive. It’s said that the evil creature can be recognized in any form it adopts because its natural form has pure white fur without stripes, and it seems incapable of creating hair with any pigment when it adopts another shape. Many of those who have collected the entire garb of the hunting cat set have died by the claws of some kind of an animal. Stories abound of hunting trips gone wrong, supposedly domesticated beasts going wild, and even of terrible bloody deaths behind locked doors that no animals should be able to penetrate. The common thread through all these stories is that the death occurred when the owner of the garb was not wearing it. If the rakshasa is at fault, as many suspect, its motives remain a mystery because the pieces are always left behind with the body of their owner. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure  and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  COLLECTION BENEFITS  CHAPTER 5  MAGIC ITEM SETS  The garb of the hunting cat provides you with a deadly rending attack and the power to disappear from sight. When wearing the entire garb of the hunting cat, you take on the appearance of a humanoid tiger during combat. When this occurs, the fur on the various items appears to be that of a living creature, making you appear something like a bestial rakshasa or weretiger. 2 Pieces: If, during your turn, you hit a single foe with both a primary claw glove attack and an off-hand claw glove attack, the second attack rends, dealing an extra 3d6 points of damage. You can rend only once per round. 3 Pieces: Once per day, you can use invisibility on yourself (CL 3rd) as a standard (mental) action.  CLAW GLOVES Illus. by W. England  Price (Item Level): 5,604 gp (10th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. These gloves are made from tiger skin and fitted with sharp steel claws on the end of each finger.  Garb of the hunting cat  Claw gloves are treated as a pair of +1 punching daggers for the purpose of fighting with them when both are worn. However, wearing claw gloves does not inhibit your ability to wield other weapons or otherwise use your hands. In addition, if you charge or use Spring Attack while you are wearing claw gloves  Garb of the Hunting Cat Pieces and Abilities Piece Mask of the tiger Claw gloves Mantle of the predator  Body Slot Face Hands Shoulders  Price (Level) 4,000 gp (8th) 5,604 gp (10th) 8,000 gp (11th)  Ability Gain Track (or +5 Survival); low-light vision +1 punching daggers; two claw attacks on charge or Spring Attack +5 on Hide and Move Silently; +1d6 against foes denied Dex bonus to AC  Garb of the Hunting Cat Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces  Benefit Rend with claw gloves 1/day invisibility  199  620_10762_Chp5.indd 199  12/21/06 5:50:19 AM  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  and both your hands are empty, you can make an off-hand claw glove attack in addition to the normal claw glove attack granted (though both attacks take normal penalties for fighting with two weapons). You can’t combine this extra attack with an attack with any other weapon, nor is it cumulative with any other effect that grants you extra attacks when charging or using Spring Attack. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Craft Wondrous Item, magic fang, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp (plus 604 gp for two masterwork punching daggers), 200 XP, 5 days.  Illus. by W. England  MANTLE OF THE PREDATOR  Mantle of the predator  Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This short, flexible cape is made from tiger skin and feels warm to the touch. A mantle of the predator grants you a +5 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. In addition, you deal an extra 1d6 points of damage with melee attacks against foes denied their Dexterity bonus to AC. Creatures with concealment, creatures without discernible anatomies, and creatures immune to extra damage from critical hits are all immune to this extra damage. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, cat’s grace, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  MASK OF THE TIGER  Mask of the tiger  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  This steel mask is covered with tiger skin and fitted with actual tiger teeth. A mask of the tiger provides you with the benefit of the Track feat (or, if you already have that feat, a +5 competence bonus on Survival checks). In addition, you gain low-light vision. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, low-light vision (SC 134), possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  GHARYN’S MONASTIC ARRAY  The half-moon shaped blade of the kama is dangerous enough, but it becomes deadly when infused with the power of ki. When wielding this array of monastic tools, you become as the wind: at times violent and unstoppable, at other times a darting blur of speed. Gharyn’s monastic array is most useful for a monk, especially one who uses a kama to enhance her hand-to-hand fighting. Each of the items allows its wielder to better mimic the natural movements of a certain animal, and some wielders believe that by mimicking motions found in nature, they will be able to merge their physical and spiritual consciousnesses.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research Gharyn’s monastic array to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The original monastic array was discovered amid the ashes of a fallen monk known as Gharyn. He died sacrificing his life to protect his brother monks from the wrath of a red dragon. Many believe that the dragon’s fire charged Gharyn’s array with magical power. DC 20: The Monastery of the Lone Dove, a haven for ascetic monks devoted to Pelor, had strict policies of asceticism, silence, and discipline. Brothers ate two bowls of rice per day, were allowed to speak ten words outside of prayer, and had to be in their chambers by sundown. Some brothers chafed under this strict regimen. One was a monk named Gharyn. Gharyn didn’t believe such restrictions applied to him. While he espoused the support of law and order, he felt the  200  620_10762_Chp5.indd 200  12/21/06 5:50:25 AM  COLLECTION BENEFITS Any combination of two parts of Gharyn’s monastic array grants deadly efficacy to your stunning attacks and gives your physical movement an animalistic swiftness and savagery. When using all three pieces, your arm briefly seems to take the form of a striking scorpion’s tail. 2 Pieces: Add +1 to the save DC of your Stunning Fist attacks. 3 Pieces: When you score a critical hit with a scorpion kama, you can expend one of your daily uses of Stunning Fist as a free action to make that attack a stunning attack. (If you don’t have the Stunning Fist feat, this benefit has no effect).  COBRA STRAPS Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Free (mental) Weight: — These simple green straps are meant to be wrapped around the feet. When you make an unarmed attack at the end of a charge, immediately after you attempt the attack, you can activate  cobra straps to move 5 feet away from the target without provoking attacks of opportunity. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, expeditious retreat, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  PANTHER MASK Price (Item Level): 2,700 gp (7th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — This silk half-mask unmistakably mimics the visage of a hunting cat.  CHAPTER 5  Strictures bring structure, structure lends itself to law and an ascetic lifestyle. Nobara’s anger over the rebellious spirit popularized by Gharyn’s “lucky” sacrifice has grown so extreme that his days are now spent traveling between monasteries to proclaim his views. Whenever he comes upon someone wearing a piece of Gharyn’s monastic array, whether original or a copy, he calls that person out in a duel to the death. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  monastery’s strictures were meaningless, and he claimed they even hindered the success of a lawful society. Needless to say, this belief did not make him particularly popular among his very conservative and traditional brothers. He knew that a change was needed, but that it had to occur gradually for the brothers to accept it. Gharyn slowly altered his behavior and routine. He substituted barley for his bowl of rice and used long, multisyllabic words for his ten per day. He was in his room by sundown, but stayed up well past midnight. While many brothers objected to his actions, Gharyn developed a cult following in the monastery. He began to train his supporters in unusual fighting styles from around the world. He urged them to reject meaningless strictures, but encouraged people to follow the greater rules of society. This was not a rejection of order as much as an acknowledgment of the universe’s true laws and mysteries. The Monastery of the Lone Dove had begun proceedings to expel Gharyn, but fate stepped in when a flight of rampaging dragons attacked. Many of the monks, so used to their daily routines, were unable to conduct a proper defense against a siege by dragons. Gharyn took charge and led the monks in battle, proving an able leader. In the end, he sacrificed himself by shielding the other monks from the breath of a red dragon. His sacrifice gave the others time to mount an offense that repelled the dragons. In his ashes, three items remained: a set of foot wrappings, a mask, and a kama. The items that remained among Gharyn’s ashes became the uniform of the Monastery of the Lone Dove. The monks traveled far and wide, popularizing the beliefs—and attire—of Gharyn. DC 25: A monk named Nobara Lame decries Gharyn’s memory, saying that those who fondly remember the rebellious monk are lying to themselves:  A panther mask grants you the benefit of the Run feat. If you wear light or no armor, you also gain a +5-foot enhancement bonus to your land speed. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, longstrider, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,350 gp, 108 XP, 3 days.  SCORPION KAMA Price (Item Level): 6,302 gp (10th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This simple kama is unadorned except for a single scorpion etched into the blade. This +1 kama deals damage equal to your unarmed strike damage (if that is greater than the normal damage for a kama). Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, Stunning Fist, magic weapon, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp (plus 302 gp for masterwork kama), 240 XP, 6 days.  Gharyn’s Monastic Array Pieces and Abilities Piece Cobra straps Panther mask Scorpion kama  Body Slot Feet Face — (held)  Price (Level) 1,400 gp (5th) 2,700 gp (7th) 6,302 gp (10th)  Ability 1/day move 5 feet after charge Run; +5-ft. bonus to speed in light or no armor +1 kama deals unarmed strike damage  Gharyn’s Monastic Array Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces  Benefit +1 to Stunning Fist attack DC Critical hit with scorpion kama delivers Stunning Fist attack  201  620_10762_Chp5.indd 201  12/21/06 5:50:35 AM  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  INSTRUMENTS OF THE BLOOD GIFT  The three instruments of the blood gift fuel magic through personal sacrifice. When precious blood is spilled, magical energy is unleashed. With the proper instruments, that energy can be harnessed, directed, and used toward ends both foul and fair. The instruments of the blood gift are most useful for sorcerers who want to further enhance their sorcery—if they aren’t too squeamish to sacrifice their own blood. Characters of draconic origin can also make use of the instruments’ power, regardless of class.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the instruments of the blood gift to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The instruments of the blood gift were created by a sorcerer named Palamandius, who used the principle behind their manufacture to free himself and other sorcerers from the tyranny of a mysterious group called the Wizards of the Pure.  DC 20: A cabal known as the Wizards of the Pure sought to eliminate all inborn magical talent in the world. The cabal despised all those who came by their magic from birth without study or sacrifice—they equated such gifts with devilish pacts and demonic corruption. The Pure spoke of the dangers of uncontrolled magical ability and “untrained talent.” In truth, the Wizards of the Pure did more than seek—they sent out agents to secretly round up a sampling of sorcerers and other spontaneous spellcasters. Across many lands, sorcerers of power large and small went missing. The captives found themselves bound within the confi nes of a dead zone where magic, both inborn and learned, was suppressed. There they were housed, without explanation and without hope of release. The Wizards of the Pure hoped that they could kill a creature’s talent for sorcery if the flame was doused long enough. All the kidnapped sorcerers served the Pure as subjects in this hateful experiment. Fortunately for the captives, one among them, a spellscale (see Races of the Dragon) named Palamandius, possessed particular talent. In his dreams, he could almost taste again the magic that once ran in his blood. In those dreams, he found salvation. Using the power of his own blood to wake and catalyze his suppressed sorcery—even  within the dead magic zone—he blasted himself and his companions free. Unprepared for the escape, the Pure saw its power base destroyed. With the insight gained while in captivity, Palamandius crafted his item set, which is powered through a sacrifice of blood. As a result, he named them the instruments of the blood gift. DC 25: A scattering of surviving members of the Wizards of the Pure still lurk in large cities and villages. Now and then, one or more of them, working alone or in temporary alliance, decides to murder a passing sorcerer out of fear and rage over the splintering of their once-powerful cabal. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  COLLECTION BENEFITS When you wear two instruments of the blood gift, your eyes take on a reddish tint and your skin becomes faintly ruddy. When wearing all three parts, your eyes smolder with liquid fire and your skin flushes with empowered blood. 2 Pieces: You automatically stabilize when reduced to –1 to –9 hit points. 3 Pieces: You can expend a sorcerer spell slot as a swift (command) action to heal yourself of a number of points of damage equal to twice the spell slot’s level. This ability functions three times per day.  BANDS OF BLOOD RAGE Price (Item Level): 2,600 gp (7th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) enchantment Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 2 lb. These armbands are made from red gold studded with tiny rubies. Dozens of needlesharp spikes extend slightly from the inside of the bands. Each time you don bands of blood rage, they deal 1 point of damage to you. This damage can’t be healed as long as you wear these armbands. When you activate bands of blood rage, you and any willing ally within 30 feet can enter a blood rage that lasts for 5 rounds.  202  620_10762_Chp5.indd 202  Instruments of the blood gift  12/21/06 5:50:37 AM  Instruments of the Blood Gift Pieces and Abilities Piece Bands of blood rage Barb of retribution Blood claw choker  Body Slot Arms Hands Throat  Price (Level) 2,600 gp (7th) 4,500 gp (9th) 12,000 gp (13th)  Ability 3/day grant blood rage 1/day force enemy to reroll save with penalty +2 Con; 2/day regain sorcerer spell slot  Instruments of the Blood Gift Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces  Benefit Automatically stabilize at –1 to –9 hp 3/day expend sorcerer spell slot to heal damage  Price (Item Level): 4,500 gp (9th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: 1 lb. These barbed chains are forged of reddish metal. Each time you don barbs of retribution, they deal 1 point of damage to you. This damage can’t be healed as long as you wear these barbed hand wrappings. When you activate barbs of retribution and sacrifice a sorcerer spell slot of 2nd level or higher, you can force an enemy within 30 feet to reroll a saving throw that just succeeded, with a penalty equal to half the level of the spell sacrificed. This effect manifests as a stream of arcane energy flowing from your hands toward the target.  BLOOD CLAW CHOKER Price (Item Level): 12,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) necromancy and transmutation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — This unusual device appears to be some sort of amulet worn as a choker necklace. However, sharp barbs point inward, and look capable of shredding muscle and flesh. Each time you don a blood claw choker, it deals 1 point of damage to you. This damage can’t be healed as long as you wear the item. A blood claw choker grants you a +2 enhancement bonus to your Constitution score. This effect functions continuously. In addition, when you activate a blood claw choker, you regain any one sorcerer spell slot that you have already used today (up to a maximum of 5th level). The slot becomes available as if you had never cast a spell of that level. At the time you activate it, the choker deals damage to you equal to twice the level of the spell slot regained. This ability functions twice per day.  Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bear’s endurance, vampiric touch, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 6,000 gp, 480 XP, 12 days.  CHAPTER 5  BARBS OF RETRIBUTION  If you have the dragonblood subtype (see Races of the Dragon or Dragon Magic), you can instead sacrifice your own hit points when activating the barbs. You must sacrifice at least 5 hit points, and the rerolled save is made with a penalty equal to –1 per 5 hit points expended (maximum –5 for 25 hit points spent). This effect manifests as a stream of fiery blood flowing from your hands toward the target. Barbs of retribution function once per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, bestow curse, sorcerer or dragonblood subtype, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,250 gp, 180 XP, 5 days.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  This blood rage can’t be ended prematurely except by unconsciousness or any effect that would end a rage (such as a calm emotions spell). Unlike a barbarian’s rage, the blood rage doesn’t limit your actions in any way. While in a blood rage, a character gains a +5 morale bonus on melee weapon damage rolls. However, each affected creature also takes 5 points of damage each round at the end of its turn as its own body suffers under the strain. If you are a sorcerer or you have the dragonblood subtype (see Races of the Dragon or Dragon Magic), you also gain a +5 morale bonus on damage with your arcane spells while in a blood rage created by bands you wear. Bands of the blood rage function three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, rage, sorcerer or dragonblood subtype, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,300 gp, 104 XP, 3 days.  RAIMENT OF THE FOUR  The items of the raiment of the four are energized by the four cornerstones of the world: earth, sky, sea, and sun. When you don pieces of the four, you become more attuned with reality itself, even gaining a measure of control over it. Individual items from the raiment are useful to any character, and the entire set is particularly useful for druids, rangers, and any other spellcasters who travel to difficult, dangerous places.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana) or Knowledge (nature), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the raiment of the four to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: A charismatic druid named Alain made his home in the village of Ra’anan. The village was the target of various natural disasters—droughts, floods, tornados, and more. Alain was able to fend off many of these disasters because of his bond with nature. One night a vision came to him, instructing him in the methods to create a set of magic items tied to the earth, sky, sea, and sun. Following the instructions from his vision, Alain traveled to the four corners of the world to gather the necessary components for each item. Once constructed, the raiment of the four aided Alain in his exploits, which eventually expanded beyond the small village in which he was born. With the raiment he could travel safely through deadly areas of the world, and survive once there. Alain  203  620_10762_Chp5.indd 203  12/21/06 5:50:41 AM  Raiment of the Four Pieces and Abilities Piece Gloves of the starry sky Goggles of the golden sun Periapt of the sullen sea Belt of the wide earth  Body Slot Hands Face Throat Waist  Price (Level) 1,100 gp (4th) 4,000 gp (8th) 6,000 gp (10th) 8,000 gp (11th)  Ability Emit light; 3/day spontaneously cast magic missile Immune to blindness, dazzling; 3/day spontaneously cast fireball Hold breath 12 hours; 2/day spontaneously cast freedom of movement Carrying capacity doubled; 2/day spontaneously cast teleport  Illus. by J. Thomas  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  Raiment of the Four Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces 4 pieces  Benefit Resistance to cold 5 Resistance to cold 5, electricity 5 Resistance to cold 5, electricity 5, and fire 5; 1/day commune (4 questions)  traveled the worlds for the rest of his days, never again returning to Ra’anan. DC 20: Alain’s spirit is said to be drawn to pieces of the raiment. If all four pieces are brought together, Alain’s spirit can communicate with the wearer, imparting secrets of the multiverse. DC 25: The orc shaman Grotarb the Sly once wore the raiment of the four, but only briefly. The orcs of Grotarb’s tribe heard strange cries in the night from the shaman’s private cavern. The next day, the orcs of the tribe found the drowned, burned, and partly dismembered body of their shaman, but no pieces of the raiment. It’s said to this day that Grotarb’s dark spirit is sometimes drawn to those who find two or more pieces of the raiment, hoping to visit upon them the same harm that the great spiritual force visited upon him. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  you have from your race, class, or template. 3 Pieces: You gain resistance to cold 5 and electricity 5, which stacks as described above. 4 Pieces: You gain resistance to cold 5, electricity 5, and fire 5, which stacks as described above. Once per day, you  can ask four questions of the spirit of the druid Alain, as the commune spell (CL 9th), but using this ability negates the energy resistances granted by the raiment until the next sunrise.  BELT OF THE WIDE EARTH Price (Item Level): 8,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) conjuration Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: — Made of thick leather, this belt is covered in cracks and fissures reminiscent of dry earth and fastened by a large, obsidian buckle. While wearing a belt of the wide earth, your carrying capacity is doubled. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, two times per day you can activate the belt and sacrifice a prepared spell or spell slot of 5th level or higher to use teleport (as the spell), using your own caster level or that of the belt, whichever is higher. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, teleport, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 4,000 gp, 320 XP, 8 days.  COLLECTION BENEFITS Wearing multiple pieces of the raiment of the four grants you an increasing number of protections derived from aspects of the sky, sun, sea, and earth. When you wear all four parts and use a belt of the wide earth to teleport, it seems as if a pillar of fire strikes down from the sky to engulf you (and anyone else being transported). When the flame dissipates, the travelers are gone. 2 Pieces: You gain resistance to cold 5; this stacks with any similar resistances  GLOVES OF THE STARRY SKY Price (Item Level): 1,100 gp (4th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 15) evocation Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: — These supple gloves are velvet black. In their darkness, stars seem to swim. Raiment of the four  204  620_10762_Chp5.indd 204  12/21/06 5:50:43 AM  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: — The reflective gold lenses of these goggles are gripped in thick midnight blue steel wrapped in leather. While wearing goggles of the golden sun, you are immune to blindness and dazzling effects. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, three times per day you can activate these goggles and sacrifice a prepared spell or spell slot of 3rd level or higher to use fireball (as the spell; Reflex DC 14 half), using your own caster level or that of the goggles, whichever is higher. The fireball created by the gloves resembles a hurtling, exploding comet. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fireball, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  PERIAPT OF THE SULLEN SEA Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) abjuration Activation: — and standard (mental) Weight: — This sea-blue gem seems to shiver and flow, as a drop of seawater barely able to maintain its shape.  RAIMENT OF THE STORMWALKER  To wear the raiment of the stormwalker is to become the storm. With it, you can travel on the thunderclouds and strike at foes like lightning. Cloaked in clouds, booming like thunder, and crackling with electricity, you become a tempest. The raiment of the stormwalker works best in the hands of a monk, druid, or other character who enters melee but prefers not to wear armor. In particular, a druid should consider the items of this set, as its powers are available while in wild shape. However, a character of any class should consider collecting at least two pieces of the set to gain some of the raiment’s lesser collection benefits and the abilities of the desired items.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana) or Knowledge (nature), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the raiment of the stormwalker to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The first Stormwalker was a half-orc druid. Unwelcome in the societies of both parents, he learned to live in the wilderness. The seasons were his teachers, and the beasts his family. The half-orc brought the rains to wash away his father’s village and a lightning strike to consume his mother’s home. Then he took the storm as his symbol and came to be known as the Stormwalker. He crafted the first raiment of the stormwalker for himself, and since his death, the secrets of its creation and  the title of Stormwalker have been passed on to others. DC 20: The first Stormwalker was killed by his half-sister in revenge for his deadly attack on their human mother’s home. She was killed out of vengeance as well, dying at the hands of the Stormwalker’s orc father, who desired the power of his son’s creations. The secrets of the raiment thus passed into the possession of both orcs and humans, and now druids of both races claim the Stormwalker title, crafting items with the same name. DC 25: An inescapable vortex of vengeance seems to follow those who wear the whole raiment. No curse can be detected on the items, but putting on the whole raiment and becoming one of the Stormwalkers always seems a harbinger of trouble to come. Old enemies return and the wearer soon finds that once-fast friends become foes. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  CHAPTER 5  GOGGLES OF THE GOLDEN SUN  While wearing a periapt of the sullen sea, you can hold your breath for up to 12 hours before having to make Constitution checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, two times per day you can activate the periapt and sacrifice a prepared spell or spell slot of 4th level or higher to use freedom of movement (as the spell), using your own caster level or that of the periapt, whichever is higher. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, freedom of movement, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  While wearing gloves of the starry sky, you emit a bright, silvery radiance equivalent to a light spell. You can douse or renew this light with a standard (mental) action. In addition, three times per day you can activate these gloves and sacrifice a prepared spell or spell slot of 1st level or higher to use magic missile (as the spell), using your own caster level rather than that of the gloves. The missiles created by the gloves appear as a series of tiny falling stars. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, magic missile, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 550 gp, 44 XP, 2 days.  COLLECTION BENEFITS Wearing multiple pieces of the raiment of the stormwalker gives you the power to create clouds, call down electricity from the sky, and laugh off lightning strikes. When you wear the entire raiment of the stormwalker, the robe of thunder flashes with lightning that crackles across the other parts of the raiment. All the collection benefits of the raiment function normally for and can be activated by a druid while in wild shape, even if the items have melded with her form and would otherwise be considered nonfunctional. 2 Pieces: You can use obscuring mist (CL 5th) as a standard (mental) action three times per day. 3 Pieces: You can use call lightning (CL 5th) as a standard (mental action) once per day. 4 Pieces: You take only half damage from electricity. If such an attack allows a save for half damage, you instead take no damage on a successful save.  205  620_10762_Chp5.indd 205  12/21/06 5:50:47 AM  Raiment of the Stormwalker Pieces and Abilities Body Piece Stormfire ring Bracers of lightning Robe of thunder Cloudwalker anklets  Slot Ring Arms Body Feet  Price (Level) 4,000 (8th) 11,000 (13th) 38,000 (17th) 50,000 (18th)  Ability 5/day faerie fire deals 1d6 damage/round for 5 rounds Attacks deal +1d6 electricity damage Take half or no damage from sonic attacks; deal 2d6 sonic damage to attackers Continuous air walk  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  Raiment of the Stormwalker Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces 4 pieces  Benefit 3/day obscuring mist 1/day call lightning Half or no damage from electricity  BRACERS OF LIGHTNING Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Arms Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb.  Illus. by B. Hagan  Each of these wide, faintly glowing bracers is made of four thin, rectangular quartz crystals joined by narrow silver bands. A set of bracers of lightning allows you to charge your melee and ranged weapon attacks with electricity. When you activate the bracers, they visibly crackle with electricity for 1 round. During this time, your melee and ranged attacks gain the shock property (DMG 225). Even your melee touch attacks deal this extra electricity damage. A druid can activate this item while in wild shape. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, call lightning, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days.  Cloudwalker anklets allow you to move through the air as if affected by an air walk spell. A druid benefits from wearing this item even while in wild shape. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, air walk, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 25,000 gp, 2,000 XP, 50 days .  ROBE OF THUNDER Price (Item Level): 38,000 gp (17th) Body Slot: Body Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) transmutation Activation: — or standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This silk robe roils with the colors of storm clouds, constantly shifting in shade and hue. While you wear a robe of thunder, you take only half damage from sonic attacks. If such an attack allows a save for half damage, you instead take no damage with a successful save. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation.  Price (Item Level): 50,000 gp (18th) Body Slot: Feet Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: — Weight: — Designed to go around the wearer’s ankles, each of these bands consists of two halfcircles of carved quartz joined by a silver hinge and clasp.  620_10762_Chp5.indd 206  STORMFIRE RING Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Ring Caster Level: 12th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) evocation Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: — This ring of faceted clear crystal contains a faint blue-white glow. When you activate a stormfire ring, it creates a faerie fire effect of crackling lightning that lasts for 5 rounds. This effect functions as the spell, except that each creature affected takes 1d6 points of electricity damage each round for the duration. Using the ring on a creature that is already affected doesn’t increase the damage dealt, but it does extend the effect’s duration. A stormfire ring functions five times per day. A druid can activate this item even while in wild shape. Prerequisites: Forge Ring, faerie fire, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  CLOUDWALKER ANKLETS  206  When activated, a robe of thunder surrounds you in an invisible, faintly rumbling aura of thunder that lasts for 5 rounds (Listen DC 10 to hear the aura). This aura deals 2d6 points of sonic damage to any creature striking you with a natural attack or nonreach melee weapon. This ability functions three times per day. A druid benefits from wearing this item and can activate it even while in wild shape. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, control weather, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 19,000 gp, 1,520 XP, 38 days.  Raiment of the stormwalker  12/21/06 5:50:48 AM  REGALIA OF THE HERO  COLLECTION BENEFITS Wearing multiple parts of the regalia of the hero awakens your ability to inspire and command others. When you wear two items, your eyes sparkle with the clarity of conviction, and your posture straightens with confidence. When you sound a horn of resilience while wearing the other two pieces, all three items flash with gold light, like the promise of sunrise chasing away night’s dreary doubts. 2 Pieces: You can grant a single ally within 30 feet (other than yourself) a +5 insight bonus on a single attack, save, or skill check as an immediate (command) action. This ability functions once per day. 3 Pieces: You use a standard (command) action to grant a single ally within 30 feet (other than you) an extra move action, taken immediately. (If you have the marshal’s grant move action class feature, this benefit instead affects all allies within 30 feet of you.) This ability functions once per day.  Illus. by J. Thomas  Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the regalia of the hero to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The three items of this set belonged to a courageous soldier named Reynard. He sacrificed his life to allow his fellow soldiers to escape from an army of orcs. Many believe that his sacrifice empowered the regalia, allowing them to inspire future generations. DC 20: Bards fondly recall in song and prose the Coalition of the Bulwark, whose brave sacrifices enabled the defeat of a great orc invasion. One of the great heroes of the war was a young soldier named Reynard Ellison. Reynard served as an elite scout for the army, but his best talents lay elsewhere. His songs were electrifying, his words calmed fears, and his very presence in combat seemed to steady the hands of his allies on their weapons. During the war, Reynard conducted a raid into the heart of the orcs’ offense. The raid successfully discovered the orc’s  CHAPTER 5  LORE  DC 25: The Coalition of the Bulwark persists yet, always vigilant to the possibility of another great orc invasion into civilized lands. The Coalition seeks accomplished spies and adventurers to supplement their own patrols. They occasionally send such groups into orc-infested wilderness to monitor the orcs and gauge the probability of a new leader arising who could pull their disparate tribes together. Anyone applying at the Fortress of the Bulwark could be assigned such a mission, as well as given aid and assistance in the fulfillment of that mission. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  The three pieces of the regalia of the hero are excellent tools for inspiring trust in others. The trappings aid their wearer by enabling him to aid others. Through mere desire, the wearer can inspire trust and greatness, and pull victory from seemingly insurmountable odds. The regalia of the hero is useful for a bard or a marshal (MH 11), or anyone who wants to motivate allies (or oneself) to greater heights of ability and increase his chance of success.  plans and codes, but before the raiders could retreat, the creatures mounted a fierce counterattack. Reynard fought in the rear guard as they retreated, his encouraging shouts and skill with his blade allowing his fellow soldiers to escape. Reynard, however, failed to return through the breach. While holding off the enemy, he was slain by the throng of orcs. The pilfered plans and codes allowed the Coalition of the Bulwark to finally thwart the invasion. In the aftermath, some of Reynard’s items were recovered, including his helm, horn, and badge. The intensity of Coalition members’ thankfulness and remorse over Reynard’s loss is said to have directly transfigured the items, creating the item set now called the regalia of the hero.  Badge of valor  Regalia of the Hero Pieces and Abilities Piece Badge of valor  Body Slot Throat  Price (Level) 1,200 gp (5th)  Helm of tactics  Head  2,000 gp (6th)  Horn of resilience  — (held)  5,000 gp (9th)  Ability 3/day allies gain +2 on saves against charm/fear, or increase inspire courage bonus by 1 3/day allies deal +2 damage against flanked foes, or increase effect of minor aura by 1 2/day allies gain DR 5/—, or increase effect of major aura by 1, or grant 50 temporary hp  Regalia of the Hero Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces  Benefit 1/day grant nearby ally +5 on attack, save, or skill check 1/day grant nearby ally bonus move action  207  620_10762_Chp5.indd 207  12/21/06 5:50:53 AM  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  REGALIA OF THE PHOENIX  Horn of resilience  BADGE OF VALOR Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Moderate; (DC 17) abjuration Activation: Immediate (mental) Weight: —  Illus. by J. Thomas  This badge is stamped with the image of an impenetrable fortress over which shines a golden sun. When you activate a badge of valor, you and all allies within 60 feet gain a +2 bonus on the next save you or they make against a charm or fear effect before the start of your next turn. If you have the bardic music ability to inspire courage, you can activate a badge of valor to increase the bonus granted by that ability by 1 for the duration of its effect. A badge of valor functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, remove fear, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  HELM OF TACTICS Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) transmutation Activation: Swift (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This metallic helm is forged of a gray, strangely swirled iron alloy. When you activate a helm of tactics, you and all allies within 60 feet gain a +2 bonus on melee weapon damage rolls against enemies that you or they are flanking. This benefit lasts for 10 rounds, but allies who move more than 60 feet from you lose the benefit until they return within the area.  If you are a marshal, you can activate a helm of tactics to increase the effect of your minor aura by 1. This effect lasts for 10 rounds. A helm of tactics functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fox’s cunning, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  HORN OF RESILIENCE Price (Item Level): 5,000 gp (9th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) enchantment Activation: Standard (manipulated) Weight: — This bone horn is banded with a golden-hued iron alloy. The image of an idealized fortress is scribed deeply in the horn’s side. When you activate a horn of resilience, you and all allies within 30 feet gain damage reduction 5/—. This benefit lasts for 5 rounds, but allies who move more than 30 feet from you lose the benefit until they return within the area. If you are a marshal, you can activate a horn of resilience to increase the effect of your major aura by 1. This effect lasts for 5 rounds. If you have the bardic music ability to inspire greatness, you can activate a horn of resilience to grant the target of that ability an extra 50 temporary hit points. These hit points last until depleted or the duration of your inspire greatness ability ends, and they don’t stack with any other source of temporary hit points. A horn of resilience functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, heroism, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,500 gp, 200 XP, 5 days.  Worn by royalty and borne by conquerors, the regalia of the phoenix has no equal among the magic crafted by humans or elves. Individually, the pieces that make up the regalia are magic items of stunning beauty and reasonable power, but together they make you a commanding figure of flames, lending you the regal authority of the regalia’s namesake and allowing you to stave off death time and again. The regalia of the phoenix can be used to good effect by many characters, but sorcerers and warlocks (CAr 5) fi nd it most useful. Both kinds of characters rely on Charisma and can wield the talon scepter, a simple weapon. Remember that you can use the rules in Chapter 6 to increase the benefit the items grant, so the +2 to Charisma granted by a crown of flames could become +4 or higher. If you are a warlock or sorcerer who has a phoenix cloak, consider replacing any invocation or spell that grants you the ability to fly; you will benefit more from the item and the versatility of having access to a different effect that you can bring to bear on your foes.  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the regalia of the phoenix to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The regalia of the phoenix sears its story into the mind of every ambitious noble who hears it. It made its first fiery appearance in the possession of the Phoenix Queen, a sorcerer of tremendous power who took the throne of a longforgotten kingdom by force. Because the Phoenix Queen possessed all the elements of the regalia, she could not be defeated, and anyone who rose against her was burnt to a cinder. After years of her vicious rule, a lover tricked her into removing her mask, pleading with her to see her face. When she pulled the mask away, revealing a face of cold beauty untouched by remorse or sorrow, assassins rose from the shadows, and she fell beneath their many blades. DC 20: After the assassins killed the Phoenix Queen, they quarreled over the regalia. Only four survived, each taking a single piece. Fearing attempts by the others to steal their pieces, they fled the  208  620_10762_Chp5.indd 208  12/21/06 5:50:55 AM  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  kingdom, spreading knowledge of the regalia of the phoenix to foreign lands. DC 25: The forgotten kingdom of legend was an elf empire, and some say that the Phoenix Queen’s lover also survived the assassin’s quarrel. According to some, the lover was true to his pitiless mistress, and the assassins tricked him into asking the queen to remove her mask. Rumors persist that this elf lives still, clutching to life despite his extreme age and the call of his ancestors, hanging on with the inhuman strength that only a thirst for vengeance can give. It’s said he seeks any who would dare profit from the assassins’ foul deed by using any piece of the regalia or its copies. When he finds them, he snuffs out their lives as calmly as one might blow out a candle. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  COLLECTION BENEFITS Regalia of the phoenix  times per day. Only after all five uses of this power are expended does the set’s resistance to fire collection benefit (see above) function. 4 Pieces: The regalia automatically produces a heal effect (CL 11th) on you if you are reduced to 0 to –9 hit points. This ability functions once per day.  CROWN OF FLAMES Price (Item Level): 8,500 gp (12th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 8th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) transmutation Activation: — or immediate (mental) Weight: —  The tines of this gem-encrusted crown are twisted and sharp, like a ring of flames frozen in gold.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  Wearing parts of the regalia of the phoenix grants its owner protection from fire and even the immunity to flames that the legendary phoenixes enjoy. When a creature wears all the pieces of the regalia of the phoenix and wields the talon scepter, all the items appear to transform into pure fire, and the phoenix cloak takes on the shape of fiery wings. Should the user of the whole regalia fall in battle, her body seems to be consumed by that fire and then remade, whole and hale again, in a burst of rubycolored light. 2 Pieces: When you are dealt fire damage, the set automatically provides you with resistance to fire 5 against that attack only. This ability functions five times per day. 3 Pieces: When you are dealt fire damage, the set automatically provides you with immunity to fire against that attack only. This ability functions five  A crown of flames continuously grants you a +2 enhancement bonus to Charisma. In addition, once per day, it can be activated to surround you in a sheath of red flames that functions like a fire shield spell (warm only) lasting for 5 rounds. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, eagle’s splendor, fire shield, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 4,250 gp, 340 XP, 9 days.  Regalia of the Phoenix Pieces and Abilities Piece Raptor’s mask Crown of flames Talon scepter Phoenix cloak  Body Slot Face Head — (held) Shoulders  Price (Level) 3,500 gp (8th) 8,500 gp (12th) 10,305 gp (13th) 50,000 gp (18th)  Ability +5 on Spot checks; immunity to blindness and dazzling effects +2 Charisma; 1/day fire shield +1 flaming light mace; swift ray of fire deals 1d6 damage Fly with perfect maneuverability at your land speed  Regalia of the Phoenix Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces 4 pieces  Benefit 5/day resistance to fire 5 5/day immunity to fire 1/day heal automatically when you reach 0 to –9 hp  209  620_10762_Chp5.indd 209  12/21/06 5:50:58 AM  Raptor’s mask Crown of ﬂames  PHOENIX CLOAK Price (Item Level): 50,000 gp (18th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: — Weight: 1 lb.  RAPTOR’S MASK Price (Item Level): 3,500 gp (8th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: — Weight: — This golden half-mask has a large, sharp beak like that of an eagle and feathery flanges of gold that sweep away from the eyes. Each eyehole is covered by a large ruby that gleams with an inner light.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  A phoenix cloak grants you a fly speed equal to your land speed, with perfect maneuverability. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, fly, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 25,000 gp, 2,000 XP, 50 days.  A raptor’s mask grants you a +5 bonus on Spot checks and renders you immune to effects that would leave you blinded or dazzled. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, clairaudience/clairvoyance, glitterdust, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,750 gp, 140 XP, 4 days.  TALON SCEPTER Price (Item Level): 10,305 gp (13th) Body Slot: — (held) Caster Level: 10th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) evocation Activation: — or swift (mental) Weight: 4 lb.  Phoenix cloak  This cloak is made of incredibly fine gold chain. Its exterior is covered in paper-thin feathers of solid gold and strewn with tiny rubies. Despite its material, it feels almost as light as cloth and flows on the wind like silk.  The head of this golden scepter is wrought in the shape of an eagle’s claw. The talons seem to be made of rubies, and a flame motif adorns the entire length of the item. A talon scepter functions as a +1 flaming light mace. In addition, you can activate the scepter to create a ruby-colored ray that extends up to 30 feet. This requires a ranged touch attack and deals 1d6 points of fire damage. Prerequisites: Craft Magic Arms and Armor, flame blade, flame strike, or fireball, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 5,000 gp (plus 305 gp for masterwork light mace), 400 XP, 10 days.  SEVEN VEILS  Bright and diaphanous, the seven veils are magic made physical. Split from light by a god and sown onto the world like seeds, the veils represent the promise of power for wizards and other spellcasters. Wizards get the most benefit from the seven veils. Although any arcane spellcaster might benefit from some or all of the veils—and would appreciate the versatility granted by wearing the entire set together—a wizard typically has the greater variety of spells necessary to put the veils to best use. Each of the seven veils corresponds to one of the colors that signify the various effects of a prismatic spell, such as prismatic eye (SC 161), prismatic mist (PH2 121), prismatic ray (SC 162), prismatic spray, and prismatic wall.  Talon scepter  210  620_10762_Chp5.indd 210  12/21/06 5:51:02 AM  The veils are potent items that improve your magical versatility, giving you the resources to overcome any obstacle. Wearing multiple veils improves your magical skill and focus, grants you resistance to some types of energy damage, and eventually allows you to treat the veils as a potent runestaff. 3 Pieces: You gain a +2 competence bonus on Concentration, Knowledge (arcana), and Spellcraft checks. 5 Pieces: You gain resistance 5 to acid, electricity, and fire. 7 Pieces: You can use the seven veils like a runestaff (see page 223) to cast cone of cold, daylight, disintegrate, dispel magic, gust of wind, magic missile, and passwall each once per day by spending your own arcane spell slots of equal or higher level.  Burning veil  CHAPTER 5  COLLECTION BENEFITS  BURNING VEIL Price (Item Level): 1,000 gp (4th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) evocation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — This silky red veil is laced with garnets. It is meant to be pinned to the hair above the ears or tied about the head like a bandana.  Illus. by R. Gallegos  Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the seven veils to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: It’s said the fi rst seven veils were drawn from a rainbow by Boccob himself. The Lord of All Magics then let the veils fall to the earth, each fluttering down to a particular wizard. The seven veils correspond to the seven colors of the rainbow and the seven colors created by spells such as prismatic wall. Each veil grants an ability modeled after the effect of a color of a prismatic spell. Each veil also guards its wearer from that color’s effect if she is the subject of a prismatic spell. DC 20: Three of the wizards who received one of the seven veils decided to craft their own sets, but four of them chose instead to try to claim the six veils Boccob gave the others. A series of battles ensued, and in the end two wizards possessed complete sets while the rest lay dead. The extra pieces that had been created were left unclaimed, and so they fell into the hands of others. DC 25: The two wizards who managed to claim full sets both became liches. This turn of events is considered a coincidence by most, but some wonder if wearing all  MAGIC ITEM SETS  seven veils might somehow induce this state. Those who concern themselves with such things wonder if Boccob truly created them, or if perhaps Wee Jas crafted them for some purpose of her own. Both deities remain silent on the matter, and no one else is known to have worn a full set. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  LORE  Seven Veils Pieces and Abilities Piece Burning veil  Body Slot Head  Price (Level) 1,000 gp (4th)  Caustic veil  Waist  2,000 gp (6th)  Veil of storms  Torso  4,000 gp (8th)  Veil of whispers  Face  7,000 gp (11th)  Veil of doors  Shoulders  11,000 gp (13th)  Serpent veil  Neck  16,000 gp (14th)  Turquoise veil  Eyes  22,000 gp (15th)  Ability Immunity to red prismatic effect; 3/day deal 1d6 fire damage to foe already damaged by your fire spell Immunity to orange prismatic effect; 3/day deal 2d6 acid damage to foe already damaged by your acid spell Immunity to yellow prismatic effect; 3/day deal 4d6 electricity damage to foe already damaged by your electricity spell Immunity to indigo prismatic effect; 3/day confuse creature already affected by your enchantment spell Immunity to violet prismatic effect; 2/day dismiss creature damaged by your summoned creature Immunity to green prismatic effect; 3/day poison target of your melee touch spell Immunity to blue prismatic effect; 1/day petrify creature already affected by your transmutation spell  Seven Veils Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 3 pieces 5 pieces 7 pieces  Benefit +2 Concentration, Knowledge (arcana), Spellcraft Resistance to acid 5, electricity 5, and fire 5 Spontaneously cast cone of cold, daylight, disintegrate, dispel magic, gust of wind, magic missile, and passwall each 1/day  211  620_10762_Chp5.indd 211  12/21/06 5:51:09 AM  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  Wearing a burning veil gives you immunity to the red effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate a burning veil, it deals 1d6 points of fire damage to a single creature that has already taken fire damage from an arcane spell you cast in this round. This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, burning hands, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 500 gp, 40 XP, 1 day.  Price (Item Level): 22,000 gp (15th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) transmutation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — Waves of aquamarine and turquoise ripple in the gauzy fabric of this finely crafted veil meant to be worn over the eyes.  CAUSTIC VEIL Price (Item Level): 2,000 gp (6th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) conjuration Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — This orange silk veil can be worn as a sash, a belt, or a short skirt knotted at one hip.  Illus. by R. Gallegos  TURQUOISE VEIL  Wearing a caustic veil gives you immunity to the orange effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate a caustic veil, it deals 2d6 points of acid damage to a single  Serpent veil  creature that has already taken acid damage from an arcane spell you cast in this round. This functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, Melf’s acid arrow, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days.  SERPENT VEIL Price (Item Level): 16,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 11th Aura: Moderate; (DC 20) necromancy Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: —  Wearing a turquoise veil gives you immunity to the blue effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate a turquoise veil, it turns to stone (as the flesh to stone spell) a single creature within 30 feet that failed a save against an arcane transmutation spell you cast in this round (Fort DC 20 negates). This ability functions once per day. A turquoise veil can be worn concurrently with a veil of whispers, but not with any other item for the face slot. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, flesh to stone, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 11,000 gp, 880 XP, 22 days.  VEIL OF DOORS Price (Item Level): 11,000 gp (13th) Body Slot: Shoulders Caster Level: 9th Aura: Moderate; (DC 19) abjuration Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: —  Green reticulation covers this veil, and emerald serpent heads weight the corners. Wearing a serpent veil gives you immunity to the green effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate a serpent veil, it poisons a single creature affected by an arcane melee touch spell you cast previously in this round. The initial and secondary damage of the poison is 5d10 points of damage (Fort DC 20 negates). This ability functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, circle of death, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 8,000 gp, 640 XP, 16 days.  212  620_10762_Chp5.indd 212  Caustic veil  Turquoise veil  12/21/06 5:51:13 AM  Dark purple like a day-old bruise, this veil is far heavier than any gauze of silk should be.  VEIL OF WHISPERS Price (Item Level): 7,000 gp (11th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) enchantment Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: —  Wearing a veil of doors gives you immunity to the violet effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate a veil of doors, it magically dismisses (as the dismissal spell; Will DC 27 minus creature’s HD negates) a single extraplanar creature within 30 feet of you that was damaged in this round by a creature you summoned or called with an arcane conjuration spell. This ability functions two times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, dismissal, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 5,500 gp, 440 XP, 11 days.  This thin mesh veil is scarcely more than a cloud of indigo mist.  VEIL OF STORMS  The vestments of divinity are a set of hallowed items that allow you to deny sin, wage war against evil, and put an end to malevolence wherever it is found. The vestments of divinity are most useful if you are a good-aligned cleric or a paladin, since they enhance your divine abilities to combat evil and destroy undead. However, any character can appreciate the benefits of at least some of the items in this set.  CHAPTER 5  Veil of doors  VESTMENTS OF DIVINITY  Illus. by R. Gallegos  When you activate a veil of storms, it darkens in color to that of an angry storm with leaden clouds marked by white-gold lightning. It deals 4d6 points of electricity damage to a single creature that has already taken electricity damage from an arcane spell you cast in this round. This effect functions three times per day. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, lightning bolt, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  Veil of storms  Wearing a veil of whispers gives you immunity to the indigo effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. When you activate a veil of whispers, it renders confused a single creature within 30 feet that failed its save against an arcane enchantment spell you cast in this round (Will DC 20 negates). This effect lasts for 2 rounds and functions three times per day. A veil of whispers can be worn concurrently with a turquoise veil, but not with any other item for the face slot. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, confusion, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,500 gp, 280 XP, 7 days.  LORE  Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) evocation Activation: — and swift (mental) Weight: — This tapestrylike veil is the color of a pastoral sunrise. Wearing a veil of storms gives you immunity to the yellow effect of any prismatic spell. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. Veil of whispers  Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana) or Knowledge (religion), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the vestments of divinity to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The vestments of divinity were revealed to a holy man named Reesh N’Faeren in a vision. He spent years tracking down each sacred relic until he gathered them all.  213  620_10762_Chp5.indd 213  12/21/06 5:51:20 AM  Illus. by J. Thomas  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  DC 20: When Reesh N’Faeren was a child, his village was terrorized by flailwielding cultists calling themselves the Heralds of Hell. The cult was eventually driven off, but not before Reesh’s family was taken from him. Reesh was spared, but he grew into an adult with an unflinching hatred of all those unaligned with his own sense of righteousness. His purity of purpose was given expression in the temple where he began training as a cleric. One night, while still an acolyte, Reesh received a vision, imparting to him vague knowledge concerning the location of five sacred relics. He was given to understand that if he gathered all the items together, he could use them to destroy the Heralds of Hell. Reesh spent years adventuring, following treasure maps, tracking leads, and following up clues, until he fi nally located all the items his vision had shown him years before. With these vestments, Reesh set out to fulfi ll the penultimate quest of his life. Whether he succeeded or ultimately failed, history does not record. DC 25: A group of destruction worshipers called the Heralds of Hell has cells in several large cities. The Heralds utilize both devils and undead in their destructive rites. Some time back, several of their cells were eradicated by a holy vigilante. It’s unclear whether this vigilante was Reesh N’Faeren himself, or someone to whom Reesh passed along his vestments. Ultimately, a few cells escaped destruction, and the vigilante disappeared. It is whispered that he was killed in a conflict with the cult, and that the cells of the Heralds that remained each took one of the vestments, hoping to ensure that no one could gather them all together again. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  Vestments of divinity  COLLECTION BENEFITS BADGE OF GLORY Wearing the vestments of divinity grants you powers that bolster your ability to battle evil creatures, from a stronger resolve against their attacks to a stronger resistance against their machinations. With each new item added, you gain additional divine confidence. When all five pieces are worn together, your body takes on a silvery sheen, and your eyes become the color of glowing aquamarine. 2 Pieces: You gain a +1 sacred bonus on saves against effects created by evil creatures. 5 Pieces: Your melee attacks deal an extra 1d6 points of damage to evil creatures.  Price (Item Level): 3,400 gp (8th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) transmutation Activation: Swift (command) Weight: 1 lb. This ornate platinum badge is set with two large cabochon aquamarines. When you activate a badge of glory, the next melee attack you make on the same turn against an evil creature deals an extra 1 point of damage per two character levels. A badge of glory functions two times per day.  Vestments of Divinity Pieces and Abilities Piece Ephod of authority Lenses of revelation Cord of favor Badge of glory Phylactery of virtue  Body Slot Torso Face Waist Throat Head  Price (Level) 800 gp (3rd) 1,400 gp (5th) 3,000 gp (7th) 3,400 gp (8th) 6,500 gp (10th)  Ability Turn undead as if 1 level higher Reveal foe as undead or evil outsider +5 on Sense Motive; 3/day divine favor 2/day deal +1 damage/2 levels to evil creature +2 on saves against energy drain, death effects, and negative energy effects; 2/day death ward  Vestments of Divinity Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 5 pieces  Benefit +1 on saves against evil creatures +1d6 melee damage to evil creatures  214  620_10762_Chp5.indd 214  12/21/06 5:51:26 AM  If you have the smite evil class feature, the extra damage granted by a badge of glory is instead equal to that granted by your smite evil ability (or 1 point per two levels, whichever is greater). Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, ability to smite evil, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,700 gp, 136 XP, 4 days.  This silver cord is worn about the body as a belt. A cord of favor grants you a +5 competence bonus on Sense Motive checks. This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, three times per day you can activate the cord and sacrifice a prepared divine spell or divine spell slot of 1st level or higher to use divine favor (as the spell), using your own caster level or that of the cord, whichever is higher. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, divine favor, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 1,500 gp, 120 XP, 3 days.  EPHOD OF AUTHORITY Price (Item Level): 800 gp (3rd) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) necromancy Activation: — Weight: 2 lb. This silver vestment is set with a circle of nine semiprecious gemstones surrounding a raised, silver hemisphere. While wearing an ephod of authority, your effective cleric level is treated as one higher than your actual level for the purpose of turning (but not rebuking or commanding) undead. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, turn undead, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 400 gp, 32 XP, 1 day.  These two small, concave glass discs have a translucent silver sheen to them. You can activate lenses of revelation to perceive the true nature of any creature in sight. Activating the lenses creates a faint aura for 1 round around the target creature (visible only to you) of a particular color based on its nature: Evil Outsider: Red. Undead: Bone-white. Any Other: Green. Any effect that would defeat a detect evil spell or effect also masks a creature from lenses of revelation. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, augury, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 700 gp, 56 XP, 2 days.  PHYLACTERY OF VIRTUE Price (Item Level): 6,500 gp (10th) Body Slot: Head Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) necromancy Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: — This small black leather box attaches to two leather straps worn around the brow. Inside the box is a parchment of sacred prayers. A phylactery of virtue allows you to better resist the life-draining powers wielded by minions of undeath. You gain a +2 morale bonus on saves against energy drain, death effects, and negative energy effects (such as inflict spells or chill touch). This is a continuous effect and requires no activation. In addition, two times per day you can activate the phylactery and sacrifice a prepared divine spell or divine spell slot of 4th level or higher to use death ward (as the spell), using your own caster level or that of the phylactery, whichever is higher. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, death ward, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,250 gp, 260 XP, 7 days.  MAGIC ITEM SETS  Price (Item Level): 3,000 gp (7th) Body Slot: Waist Caster Level: 6th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) evocation Activation: — and standard (command) Weight: 1 lb.  Price (Item Level): 1,400 gp (5th) Body Slot: Face Caster Level: 5th Aura: Faint; (DC 17) divination Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: —  WRAITH’S WOE  The items that make up the wraith’s woe live up to the name, making you a deadly enemy both to spirits and the walking dead. However, although they were constructed to battle undead, the items in the set are useful in encounters with a variety of creatures, both living and unliving. Wizards, sorcerers, and other spellcasters who have poor Fortitude saves likely benefit from this set the most, since they are in more danger from the necromantic powers typically possessed by undead. Also, level drain reduces a spellcaster’s effectiveness dramatically, whereas a fighter or other character focused on physical attacks can likely still get by even with the penalties of negative levels. Finally, gauntlets of ghost fighting offer a rare opportunity for spellcasters to affect incorporeal foes normally. A set of the wraith’s woe makes a good investment for any character preparing to face undead. The relatively low prices of the items make purchasing particular pieces an option even for a low-level party. You might consider having a few characters purchase the different pieces of wraith’s woe and then having the PC who suffers the most from the attacks of undead put on all the items to restore ability damage and drain.  CHAPTER 5  CORD OF FAVOR  LENSES OF REVELATION  LORE Characters who have ranks in Knowledge (arcana) or Knowledge (religion), or who have the bardic knowledge ability, can research the wraith’s woe to learn more about these items. When a character succeeds on a check, the following lore is revealed, including the information from lower DCs. DC 15: The first example of this set was created over a century ago by a human mystic theurge who devoted herself to hunting undead after her family was slain by wraiths. This mystic theurge founded a holy order devoted to battling undead and created sets of the wraith’s woe for those who joined her quest. Members of this order had to earn items from these sets by slaying a sufficient number of undead while also adhering to the order’s ideals of bravery, self-sacrifice, and compassion for innocent mortals. DC 20: The order, known as the Blades Against Death, still exists. Composed mainly of paladins and clerics, the order sponsors adventurers of every stripe in quests against undead. Adventurers who perform well are often offered membership in the organization and granted  215  620_10762_Chp5.indd 215  12/21/06 5:51:30 AM  Wraith’s Woe Pieces and Abilities Piece Choker of life protection Gauntlets of ghost fighting  Body Slot Throat Hands  Price (Level) 14,000 (14th) 4,000 (8th)  Shirt of wraith stalking  Torso  6,000 (10th)  Ability +2 AC against undead; protection from 3 negative levels/day Ignore incorporeal miss chance; +1d6 melee damage against incorporeal creatures Hide from undead  MAGIC ITEM SETS  CHAPTER 5  Wraith’s Woe Collection Benefits Pieces Worn 2 pieces 3 pieces  Benefit Detect undead 1/day cure all your ability damage plus drain on one ability  pieces of the wraith’s woe, much as the order’s founder rewarded the original members. Being a member has other benefits, since Blades Against Death has decades of experience confronting undead, and its members have learned much during that time that can aid those who share their cause. DC 25: High-ranking members of the Blades Against Death have been heard to speak of the order’s founder as though she still lives and speaks to them. If it’s true, she must be undead herself, for no human could live so long. Those who openly suggest this possibility are labeled blasphemers by the Blades Against Death and exiled from the order. Such individuals are then never seen again, leading some to think that the Blades Against Death is capturing or killing these ex-members. Of course, to suggest such or question the order about how it handles blasphemers causes a member to be labeled a blasphemer, a fate all members take great pains to avoid. DC 30: A check result of 30 or higher reveals the location of another piece of the set. Use this to drive further adventure and direct the PCs toward some location or story you would like them to explore.  COLLECTION BENEFITS Wearing two pieces of the wraith’s woe grants you the ability to know where undead hide and to pierce their disguises. Wearing the whole set also allows you to undo the effects of encounters with undead that damage or drain ability scores. A character wearing all of the wraith’s woe takes on a haunted and pale appearance. “You look like you’ve seen a ghost” is commonly heard by those who regularly dress in all three pieces. 2 Pieces: You can activate detect undead (CL 3rd) as a standard (mental) action at will.  3 Pieces: You can activate wraith’s woe as a standard (mental) action to cure all ability damage you have, as well as restore all points drained from a single ability score of your choice. This ability can be used once per day.  CHOKER OF LIFE PROTECTION Price (Item Level): 14,000 gp (14th) Body Slot: Throat Caster Level: 7th Aura: Moderate; (DC 18) conjuration Activation: — or immediate (mental) Weight: — This slim black leather collar is set with three golden stones the size of small grapes. As long as a collar of life protection can still protect you as described below, you gain a +2 dodge bonus to Armor Class against the attacks of undead. A choker of life protection also protects you from energy drain attacks. When you would normally gain up to three negative levels, you can activate the choker to negate the negative levels. A choker can negate three negative levels per day, so it can be used three times to negate one negative level with each activation, once to negate three negative levels all at once, and so on. Each negative level prevented renders one of the collar’s three stones gray and dull. Every day at dawn, all three stones automatically dissipate the collected negative energy and once again become golden. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, restoration, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 7,000 gp, 560 XP, 14 days.  GAUNTLETS OF GHOST FIGHTING Price (Item Level): 4,000 gp (8th) Body Slot: Hands Caster Level: 13th Aura: Strong; (DC 21) conjuration Activation: — Weight: 1 lb. This pair of heavy, black leather gloves bears suns and skulls of gold on the knuckles and around each wrist. The wearer of gauntlets of ghost fighting deals damage normally to incorporeal creatures with spells or attacks, ignoring an incorporeal creature’s 50% miss chance. In addition, melee attacks made by the wearer deal an extra 1d6 points of damage against incorporeal foes. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, plane shift, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 2,000 gp, 160 XP, 4 days.  SHIRT OF WRAITH STALKING Price (Item Level): 6,000 gp (10th) Body Slot: Torso Caster Level: 3rd Aura: Faint; (DC 16) abjuration Activation: Standard (mental) Weight: 1 lb. This shiny black leather shirt bears small golden sun and skull emblems around its collar, shoulders, and cuffs. When you activate a shirt of wraith stalking, you gain the benefit of a hide from undead spell at will, except that undead are not allowed a saving throw regardless of their Intelligence. Prerequisites: Craft Wondrous Item, hide from undead, possession of a piece of the set. Cost to Create: 3,000 gp, 240 XP, 6 days.  216  620_10762_Chp5.indd 216  12/21/06 5:51:31 AM  Illus. by R. Horsley  agic items don’t function by themselves—they typically require some effort or action on the part of their owner. Generally, using a magic item has four separate steps: identifying the item, wearing the item, activating the item, and resolving the item’s effect. Each of these steps is discussed in detail below. Of course, to use a magic item, you have to get your hands on it. Later sections of this chapter discuss how to place magic items in the campaign, how to buy and sell them, and how to create and improve them.  IDENTIFYING ITEMS  When PCs find magic items as treasure, they need to determine what the items do. The following methods are available to identify magic items. Skill Checks: Certain skills allow a character to accurately identify an item. Knowledge (arcana): A character can attempt a DC 30 Knowledge (arcana) check to determine if she remembers reading of an item at one point during her studies. A successful result might give a hint to the item’s function or reveal every detail about it. This method is most appropriate for legendary items or items that have a traditional shape associated with their function. Search: You might allow close study of an item to provide some information. A command word could be etched in tiny letters on the inside of a ring, or a feathered design might hint that an item allows its wearer to fly. In such a case, a successful DC 15 Search check should reveal the clue.  620_10762_Chp6.indd 217  Spellcraft: A character using the detect magic spell can attempt a Spellcraft check to determine the school of magic associated with the item’s powers. If the character exceeds the DC for this check by 10 or more, the character magically divines the item’s functions, its means of activation, and the number of charges remaining. A character can also use Spellcraft to identify potions. The DC is 25, the check takes 1 minute, and she cannot retry if she fails. Use Magic Device: If a character succeeds on a Use Magic Device check to activate a magic item and exceeds the DC by 5 or more, the character magically divines the item’s functions, its means of activation, and the number of charges remaining. Bardic Knowledge: While not quite as useful as the skills discussed above, a successful bardic knowledge check might reveal the backgrounds, functions, and means of activating legendary or otherwise well-known items. If the item is standard equipment for a well-known faction or person, the DC is 20. If the item is uncommon or ancient, but many items like it are in circulation, the DC is 25. If the item is known only in legend, the DC is 30 or higher. A successful result should reveal something of the item’s history and give at least a hint about the item’s function. Spells: Spells are the most reliable way to identify items. Detect Magic: Obviously, the easiest way for characters to discern whether an object is magic is to use detect magic.  217  12/21/06 5:53:17 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  When focused on an item, a character can attempt a Spellcraft check to determine the school (or schools) of the highest-level spell (or spells) involved in the item’s creation, as well as the strength of the item’s aura (based on its caster level). Also, a character making such a check can divine the function of an item by succeeding by 10 or more. When a character uses detect magic on a magic item, the information you provide often serves as a clue to a smart player for identifying the item. See the detect magic spell description, PH 219, for details. Identify: The identify spell determines the functions, means of activation, and number of charges remaining for any item of less than artifact power. It takes an hour to cast and has an expensive material component, but it’s also the surest way to identify most magic items. See the identify spell description, PH 243, for details. Analyze Dweomer: This spell functions like identify, but the casting time is shorter, there’s a focus rather than an expensive material component, and the caster can determine the properties of several items with one casting of the spell. This spell is the swiftest and surest way to identify many magic items. See the analyze dweomer spell description, PH 197, for details. Hired Help: The PCs might want to consult bards, sages, or high-level spellcasters to identify items through the means outlined above. Such NPCs might also know some details or rumors about an item’s history. They always want something in return for this information. The prices for spellcasting services are noted on page 129 of the Player’s Handbook and described in more detail on page 130. If an NPC can identify the item without using spells, the character might ask for an amount of gp equivalent to the typical spell cost. Of course, an NPC might instead demand some service or trade instead of money. DM Explanation: It might be simpler to tell the players what an item is. This approach is particularly useful when the item provides a bonus you must track on actions the PC is already taking. If you have a PC using an unidentified +2 short sword, for example, use this option when it becomes a burden for you to keep mentally adding +2 to all the character’s attack rolls and damage rolls with that unidentified (to him) item. Trial and Error: The last refuge of desperate characters with an unidentified magic item, this process is often comical, but it can become an annoying waste of time. The trial-and-error process usually entails a PC attempting to use the item. A character hoping that the cloak he’s just found is actually wings of flying might say, “I put the cloak on and jump up and down, flapping my arms.” Previous D&D supplements, including the Dungeon Master’s Guide, have advised rewarding clever characters who pursue this line of inquiry. As long as you and the players find trial and error to be a fun method of learning about magic items, that’s still fine advice. If, however, your players turn it into a tedious checklist of tests (“Now I try to breathe underwater. Now I try to walk up the wall. Now I think about turning invisible. No luck? Maybe it only works for dwarves; Tordek, now you try it.”), it’s time to step in and move the game along. It’s perfectly reasonable to rule that until a character has determined a magic item’s powers, command word, or other secrets in one of the manners noted above, no amount of crazy experimentation will help.  MAGIC ITEMS AND DETECT MAGIC When detect magic identifies an item’s school of magic, this information refers to the school of the spell placed within the potion, scroll, or wand, or the prerequisite for the item’s creation. The description of each item provides its aura strength and the school it belongs to.  For items you create, if more than one spell is given as a prerequisite, the highest-level spell used in the item’s creation determines the strength of the item’s aura. If no spells are included in the prerequisites, use the following default guidelines. Item Nature Armor and protective items Weapons or offensive items Bonus to ability score, on skill check, and so on  School Abjuration Evocation Transmutation  BODY SLOTS  Each item’s description has a Body Slot entry that describes what part of the body it must be worn on to function. A normal humanoid creature has twelve body slots, enumerated here with some examples of the kinds of items that might be worn there (for nonhumanoid creatures, see Size and Shape, below). Arms: armbands, bracelets, bracers. Body: armor, robes. Face: goggles, lenses, masks, spectacles, third eyes. Feet: boots, sandals, shoes, slippers. Hands: gauntlets, gloves. Head: circlets, crowns, hats, headbands, helmets, phylacteries. Rings (2 slots): rings. Shoulders: capes, cloaks, mantles, shawls. Throat: amulets, badges, brooches, collars, medals, medallions, necklaces, pendants, periapts, scarabs, scarfs, torcs. Torso: shirts, tunics, vests, vestments. Waist: belts, girdles, sashes. Each body slot can accommodate only a single active magic item (except for the rings body slot, which allows two active rings, worn one on each hand or both on the same hand). Additional magic items could be worn in the same body slot, but only the first-worn item confers its magical abilities upon the wearer. Some body slots are described as a matched pair of body parts (such as arms, feet, or hands). If an item uses one of these body slots, it takes up both “halves” of the body slot even if worn on only one of the pair. For example, a glove of storing takes up the entire hands body slot, even though it’s only one glove. Similarly, items that come in pairs must be worn together in order to function—wearing a single gauntlet of ogre power has no effect. The Magic Item Record Sheet on page 286 indicates all the valid body slots on a character. Feel free to photocopy this page for your personal use; it can provide a useful visual aid to remember what your character is wearing and where. Some items—particularly those that have a limited number of uses per day—indicate that they must be worn for a certain length of time before they can be used. This attunement period prevents characters from treating them as disposable tools to be donned and stowed repeatedly throughout the day.  NONWORN MAGIC ITEMS Some magic items aren’t worn on the body, but are instead carried or held by the owner to gain their benefit. Such items have one of the following entries on the Body Slot line. —: The item functions or can be activated as long as it is carried somewhere on your body (but not if it’s stored in an extradimensional or nondimensional storage space, such as a bag of holding). Some rare items in this category might describe a particular manner in which you must carry them for the item to function (such as ioun stones).  218  620_10762_Chp6.indd 218  12/21/06 5:53:19 AM  — (held): You must hold the item or otherwise manipulate the item with your hand for it to function or be activated. All weapons and shields have this entry, as do many tools. In the case of a shield, simply carrying it isn’t enough—you must wear it properly as described on page 125 of the Player’s Handbook. — ([armor, shield, or weapon] crystal): Augment crystals are magic items that function only when attached to a suit of armor, shield, weapon, or other appropriate item. Like properties, you can only gain an augment crystal’s benefit while you’re wearing or holding the item in the appropriate manner. See Augment Crystals, page 221, for details.  SIZE AND SHAPE  Most of the time when a magic item is discovered, a character’s size or shape shouldn’t be an issue. As a rule, size should not keep overweight characters, characters of various genders, or characters of various races from using magic items. Players shouldn’t be penalized for choosing a halfling character or deciding that their character is especially tall, so as a rule any magic item automatically adjusts to fit its wearer. A few exceptions to this rule are given below. Armor: As long as you’re the same size category and the same general shape as the armor’s original owner, the armor functions normally for you. Halfl ings can wear armor made for goblins, and centaurs can wear armor made for wemics. However, inappropriately sized or shaped armor can’t be worn. Armor doesn’t resize to fit a wearer of a different size category, nor does armor constructed for a humanoid-shaped creature fit a nonhumanoid-shaped creature. In cases where a nonhumanoid-shaped creature tries to wear armor created for another nonhumanoid, you must use your best judgment. A blink dog could certainly fit into barding crafted for a riding dog or other Medium quadruped, but it probably couldn’t wear armor crafted for a Medium monstrous spider. Weapons: Weapons don’t change size to match the wielder. You can wield an inappropriately sized weapon with a penalty (see PH 113). Regardless of a weapon’s size, as long as you can hold a weapon you can activate its abilities; for example, a human could still activate the wishes held within a Huge luck blade even though he couldn’t wield it in combat. Shields: Like weapons, shields don’t change size to match the wielder. Unlike with weapons, you gain no benefit from using an inappropriately sized shield. You can use the following table to determine the size of armor, shields, and weapons found at random. However, it’s usually best to choose the size for an item by determining who in the adventuring group could get the most use out of it.  As a default rule, treat creatures of any shape as having all the normal body slots available. Creatures never gain extra body slots for having extra body parts (for example, a marilith still has only one hands body slot and two rings body slots). For unusual cases, here are some guidelines to help a DM particularly dedicated to details: Amorphous Creatures: Creatures without any shape, such as most oozes and the phasm (in its normal form), have no body slots and can’t wear magic items at all. Armless Creatures: Creatures without forelimbs, such as snakes, don’t have the arms, hands, or rings body slot (but see multilegged creatures, below). A creature with only a single forelimb retains these body slots, and can wear both of a pair on the same limb (such as both gloves on the same hand, and so on). Fingerless Creatures: Creatures without flexible digits or extremities, such as horses, lack the rings body slot. A creature need not be able to manipulate objects to wear rings—a hell hound can wear a ring on a toe of its forelimb. Headless Creatures: Creatures without an identifiable head, such as shambling mounds, lack the face, head, and throat body slots. Legless Creatures: Creatures without hind limbs, such as lillends, don’t have the feet body slot. Multilegged Creatures: Creatures with more than two legs can treat their foremost pair of limbs as their arms (allowing them access to the arms, hands, and rings body slots), even if those limbs are used for locomotion rather than for manipulation. Creatures with multiple legs that also have arms (such as centaurs or driders) don’t lack any body slots.  CHAPTER 6  Properties are part of another item (a weapon, shield, or suit of armor), and they function or can be activated as long as the item is worn or held properly. A shield property offers no benefit if the shield is slung over your shoulder, and a weapon (typically) doesn’t offer any benefit if it’s sheathed. Instead of a body slot entry, a property has a property entry, which describes the types of items to which this property can be applied. Unlike most other items, properties have no weight.  Size Small Medium Large or larger*  USING MAGIC ITEMS  ITEM PROPERTIES  d% 01–30 31–90 91–100 *DM’s choice  ACTIVATING MAGIC ITEMS  To use a magic item, it must be activated, although sometimes activation simply means putting a ring on your finger. Some items, once donned, function constantly. In many cases, using an item requires an action of some kind. You cannot activate an item that you do not properly possess, hold, or wear. A rod or wand must be held in your hand, a cloak must be worn on your back, and so on. Some items merely require that you carry them on your person but not specifically worn in a slot or carried in a hand (in a backpack, floating around your head, and so on). Each item in this book describes how you must carry it to benefit from its capabilities in the Body Slot entry of its description. A “—” indicates that the item merely needs to be carried on your person. Every magic item in this book has an Activation entry in its description that describes the type of action necessary (if any) to activate the item and the means of activation. The action type might be standard, full-round, move, free, swift, or immediate. For definitions of standard, full-round, move, and free actions, see pages 138–139 of the Player’s Handbook. Swift and immediate actions are described in the sidebar on page 220. Following the action type is a parenthetical descriptor that further describes the means of activation; these are described below.  219  620_10762_Chp6.indd 219  12/21/06 5:53:21 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  —: A dash on the activation line indicates that the item is always active so long as you wear, wield, or possess it in the proper manner. Simply wearing a cloak of resistance provides you with its bonus; you do not need to activate it. Similarly, a +2 flaming battleaxe grants the benefit of its magic on attacks you make with it without any special action on your part. Using an item of this type does not provoke attacks of opportunity. [Action Type] (command): Command activation means that a character speaks a command word and the item activates. No other special knowledge is needed. A command word is the key to the item’s lock, as it were. It can be a real word such as “Vibrant,” “Square,” or “Horse,” but when this is the case, the holder of the item runs the risk of activating the item accidentally by speaking the word in normal conversation. More often, the command word is a seemingly nonsensical word, or a word or phrase from an ancient language no longer in common use. Activating a command word magic item does not provoke attacks of opportunity. You cannot activate a command word item in the area of a silence spell or if you are unable to speak. [Action Type] (manipulation): Activating this type of item requires some physical manipulation of it, such as moving an immovable rod or pulling a patch from a robe of useful items. This movement is similar to the somatic component of a spell, in that you need a free hand to perform the action. Activating a manipulation item provokes attacks of opportunity. [Action Type] (mental): This type of item merely requires that you will it to function. Activating the item is a purely mental action. You can use the item in the area of a silence spell, while grappled, while paralyzed, and so on, as long as you have control of your own thoughts. Activating such a magic item does not provoke attacks of opportunity. You cannot use a mentally activated item if you are dominated, unconscious, sleeping, turned to stone, or otherwise incapable of conscious independent thought. (However, someone who dominates you could make you use a mentally activated item or give you free rein to use it within the bounds of his other instructions.) [Action Type] (spell completion): This is the activation method for scrolls. A scroll is a spell that is mostly finished. The preparation is done for the caster, so no preparation time is needed beforehand as with normal spellcasting. All that’s left to do is perform the short, simple, finishing parts of the spellcasting (the final gestures, words, and so on). To use a spell completion item safely, a character must be of high enough level in the right class  to cast the spell already. If he can’t already cast the spell, there’s a chance he’ll make a mistake (see Scroll Mishaps, DMG 238, for possible consequences). Activating a spell completion item provokes attacks of opportunity exactly as casting a spell does. You cannot activate a spell completion item if you would normally be prevented from casting the spell (for instance, you’re in the area of a silence spell and the spell has a verbal component). [Action Type] (spell trigger): Spell trigger activation is similar to spell completion, but it’s even simpler. No gestures or spell finishing is needed, just a knowledge of spellcasting and a single word that must be spoken. This means that if a wizard picks up a spell trigger activation item (such as a wand or a staff) and that item stores a wizard spell, she knows how to use it. Specifically, anyone with a spell on his or her spell list knows how to use a spell trigger item that stores that spell. (This is the case even for a character who can’t actually cast spells, such as a 3rd-level paladin.) The user must still determine what spell is stored in the item before she can activate it. Activating a spell trigger item does not provoke attacks of opportunity. — (ammunition): This type of item must be fired from a projectile weapon, such as a bow, crossbow, or sling. It activates in flight or upon reaching its target. Activating magic ammunition requires no special action; such items are activated as part of the action of firing the projectile weapon. Some kinds of magic ammunition can also be activated by throwing them (see below). [Action Type] (thrown): This type of item must be thrown and is activated upon impact or in flight. It has the same options for targeting as a splash weapon (PH 158). Throwing an item is a ranged attack and provokes attacks of opportunity. Unless stated otherwise, a thrown item is destroyed after its effect is resolved, and it cannot then be reused.  RESOLVING THE EFFECT  A magic item’s description either specifically details its effect when activated or refers you to a particular spell, power, class feature, or other entry to learn the effect. Don’t assume that just because a spell is a prerequisite that the item necessarily replicates that spell—in many cases, the spell is simply the closest reasonable effect to the item’s power.  SAVE DCS AND CASTER LEVELS Most item descriptions indicate the save DC (if any) for the item’s powers. In cases where the save DC isn’t given, the DC is 10 + (1-1/2 × the level of the spell or effect [rounded down]). (Effec-     SWIFT AND IMMEDIATE ACTIONS These action types were introduced in previous supplements. A description of how they work follows. Swift Action: A swift action consumes a very small amount of time, but represents a larger expenditure of effort and energy than a free action. You can perform one swift action per turn without affecting your ability to perform other actions. In that regard, a swift action is like a free action. However, you can perform only a single swift action per turn, regardless of what other actions you take. Immediate Action: Much like a swift action, an immediate action consumes a very small amount of time, but represents a  larger expenditure of effort and energy than a free action. Unlike a swift action, an immediate action can be performed at any time—even if it’s not your turn. Using an immediate action on your turn is the same as using a swift action, and it counts as your swift action for that turn. You cannot use another immediate action or a swift action until after your next turn if you have used an immediate action when it is not currently your turn (effectively, using an immediate action before your turn is equivalent to using your swift action for the coming turn). You also cannot use an immediate action if you are currently flat-footed.     220  620_10762_Chp6.indd 220  12/21/06 5:53:22 AM  Not all magic items allow unlimited use of their powers. Some, such as wands and a chime of opening, have a limited number of uses (or charges) before their powers are permanently depleted. Others, such as potions and scrolls, function only a single time. After you use up the last charge or use of one of these items, it becomes a nonmagical object. Partially depleted charged items can’t be recharged.  DAILY-USE ITEMS Many magic items have a limited number of uses or charges per day. When the last of these charges is used, that power is no longer available, but the item is still magical (and might even still have other powers available). Unless otherwise noted, any item with daily uses regains all of those charges at dawn each day.  SPECIAL MAGIC ITEM RULES  This book presents a variety of new or revised subcategories of magic items that share certain attributes or game rules. Each subcategory is described below.  AUGMENT CRYSTALS Tordek found a glowing green gem in the dragon’s hoard. When he touched the gem to his axe’s haft, it attached to the weapon’s base. Tordek’s axe now glowed with the same green energy, acid dripping along its length. When he removed the gem and affixed it to his dagger, the axe lost this ability, but the dagger dripped with acid instead.  CHAPTER 6  CHARGED AND SINGLE-USE ITEMS  An augment crystal is a small gem, crystal, or similar object that provides a magical effect when affi xed to a weapon, shield, or suit of armor (or any other magic item that grants an armor bonus to AC). Each item can hold a single augment crystal, but an attached crystal can be swapped for another one at any time. Attaching an augment crystal to (or removing it from) an item requires a move action that doesn’t provoke attacks of opportunity. Effectively, each eligible item has a single “slot” that can be fi lled by any appropriate augment crystal. Each augment crystal’s Body Slot entry gives the appropriate item to which it can be attached. Augment crystals are ranked as least, lesser, or greater. (Any crystal without a rank is considered a least augment crystal.) The rank not only describes the relative power level of the crystal’s effect, but also the minimum required quality or enhancement bonus of the armor, shield, or weapon for the crystal to function: • A least augment crystal functions whenever attached to an object of at least masterwork quality, even if the object itself has no magical properties. • A lesser augment crystal functions only when attached to an object with a magical enhancement bonus of +1 or higher (such as a +1 longsword or bracers of armor +1). • A greater augment crystal functions only when attached to an object with a magical enhancement bonus of +3 or higher. Only the item’s actual bonus applies, not its “effective” bonus; for example, a +1 keen holy flaming burst longsword won’t allow a greater augment crystal to function, since its actual bonus is only +1.  USING MAGIC ITEMS  tively, this assumes that the item has the minimum ability score required to cast the spell.) Similarly, each item’s description indicates the caster level of its effect. If an item doesn’t mention a caster level, assume the caster level is equal to the minimum caster level required for the highest-level spell given as a prerequisite for the item. For an item with only an enhancement bonus and no other abilities (such as a +3 longsword), the caster level is three times the enhancement bonus. The description of an item’s effect always supersedes the caster level given in the Caster Level entry. For example, even if an item with caster level 7th mimics a spell with a duration of 1 minute per caster level, if the item effect gives its duration as only 1 minute, you should ignore the normal duration in favor of this value. Staffs and runestaffs (see page 223) are exceptions to this rule. Treat the saving throw DCs for these items as if the wielder had cast the spell herself, including caster level and all modifiers to the save DC.  Augment crystals are found in Chapter 1: Armor and Chapter 2: Weapons.  RELICS Brandor stood firm as the great dragon charged. Though the iron-thewed human could feel waves of preternatural fear washing over him, he paid them no heed. The onrushing dragon’s jaws snapped with lightning speed, but its awesome teeth didn’t sink into Brandor’s armored body. Instead, they closed on his greatsword, shattering the steel as though it were brittle glass. The dragon’s eyes took on a wicked gleam as shards of broken steel fell like rain, but it wasn’t prepared for what happened next. Brandor cast aside the useless sword hilt and, with a quick prayer to Kord, seized the dragon’s horns and wrenched at the massive head. Befuddled and dismayed, the dragon tried to shake off the puny human with a toss of its head. But Brandor held on, wrenching at the great head with all his might and main. The dragon resisted the inexorable force of Brandor’s grip for a heartbeat; then it was lifted off its feet and thrown down like an immense rag doll. Outraged, the dragon writhed and tore at the human with its claws, but Brandor pressed his advantage,     BEHIND THE CURTAIN: AUGMENT CRYSTALS Augment crystals offer characters a cheap method of improving weapons and armor. Unlike adding a normal armor or weapon property, buying and using an augment crystal doesn’t require making a permanent decision about the item—if it later proves uninteresting, it can be sold or traded to help pay for a more powerful crystal or item. The “swappable” nature of augment crystals also allows a  character to be prepared for more eventualities. Paying for the ghost touch weapon property is not only a significant investment in gold, but also feels like wasted space whenever the characters aren’t fighting shadows and wraiths. On the other hand, a lesser truedeath crystal (page 66) provides the same effect but can be swapped for another crystal when you don’t face incorporeal creatures. Even low-level characters can afford to carry a couple of least crystals, and high-level characters can easily afford to keep a few extras in a bag of holding for special situations.     221  620_10762_Chp6.indd 221  12/21/06 5:53:24 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  pinning the dragon to the ground. As his allies closed in, the proud dragon was forced to yield, and Brandor stood aside while the dragon was bound. Flexing his muscles once, he allowed himself a broad grin and casually hooked his thumbs into the belt of thick, gem-studded golden links that he wore. A relic is a magic item that provides its full function only for a character devoted to the deity to whom the relic is dedicated. The user must devote a measure of spiritual energy to maintain a divine connection between the relic he wields and his deity’s power. (Relics appear throughout Chapters 1 through 4.) This divine connection can be opened in two ways. • A divine spellcaster devoted to the relevant deity can temporarily sacrifice a spell slot of the level specified in the relic’s description. He can’t use the spell slot anymore, but he can use the relic. Whenever the character prepares or readies his divine spells, he decides whether he wants to keep the divine connection to the relic active by sacrificing the spell slot. • Whether the character is a divine caster or not, he can wield a relic’s power if he has the True Believer feat (see sidebar) and a sufficiently high character level (measured by Hit Dice), as described in the item description. Typically, his character level must be high enough that he could cast spells of the level required for sacrifice if all his levels were in the cleric class. For example, Jozan is a 9th-level cleric of Pelor who finds himself in possession of a dawnstar relic. At dawn (that is, when preparing his cleric spells), he can sacrifice a 4th-level spell slot to gain the full use of the dawnstar for the day. Alternatively, he can prepare all his 4th-level spells and choose not to use the magic of the dawnstar. If Alhandra the paladin has the True Believer feat and worships Pelor, she can use the dawnstar as long as she’s 7th level or higher, because that’s the level at which she would first have a 4th-level spell slot if she were a cleric. If Jozan had the True Believer feat, he could likewise use the dawnstar at 7th level or higher, and wouldn’t have to give up a spell slot to do so. Some relics have two or more tiers of relic powers, each requiring a different level of spell sacrifice (or character level, for those with the True Believer feat). Unless indicated otherwise, paying the second cost (or meeting the second level requirement) grants the character all the relic powers of the item. All relics have a caster level of 20th, regardless of the creator’s caster level. In addition to its relic power, each relic has a base effect or power available to any character whose alignment is within one step of the associated deity’s. For example, the axe of ancestral virtue functions as a +1 keen adamantine dwarven waraxe in the hands of any character who is lawful good, lawful neutral, or neutral  good (that is, within one step of Moradin’s LG alignment). In the hands of a character not of one of these alignments, the item has no magical abilities whatsoever and is simply an adamantine dwarven waraxe. With a successful DC 20 Knowledge (religion) check, a character can identify any relic on sight. You might consider granting a character a +5 bonus on checks made to identify a relic dedicated to his church. Furthermore, a character can improve an existing relic just as he could any other magic item. An axe of ancestral virtue has an effective enhancement bonus of +2 (+1 plus another +1 for the keen property), so improving it to a +2 keen adamantine dwarven waraxe would cost 10,000 gp, just as it would for any other weapon. In general, a character can add only to the item’s nonrelic powers; however, you might allow a particularly dedicated character to add a new relic power (with an appropriate cost). Any additions to a relic—whether relic powers or not—must fit the theme of the deity to which the item is dedicated. For example, adding the merciful weapon property to the morningstar of the many (a relic dedicated to the murderous god Erythnul) would be inappropriate. The DM is always the fi nal arbiter of such decisions.  Putting Relics into Play Relics are generally not available for purchase, nor will a character trying to sell one automatically fi nd a buyer. These items are rarer than other magic items; usually no more than a halfdozen copies of each relic exist. Secondly, they’re tied so tightly to worship of a particular deity that only a few characters can use them. Item descriptions provide market prices for each relic, but a PC will never find a price tag on a relic. Prices are given for relics to help the DM design appropriate treasure for the monsters or NPCs in the campaign. A church might offer a finder’s fee or gifts equivalent to half the market price if a party were to return a lost relic, but such a situation should be roleplayed, since the deal depends greatly on the relationship between the church and the PCs who acquired the relic. Here are a few ways a DM can put a relic into play. • The traditional enemy of a PC’s church—knowingly or unknowingly—has acquired a holy relic dedicated to the character’s deity. You might send the PCs looking specifically for the relic or let them stumble across it accidentally. • A relic once wielded by a great hero might show up in the treasure hoard of the powerful monster (such as a dragon) that caused the hero’s death many years (or decades or centuries) earlier. The characters might discover the relic unexpectedly or (using Gather Information or divination magic) intentionally follow its trail.     RELIC FEATS The following feats previously appeared in Complete Divine, and are reprinted here for convenience.  Sanctify Relic [Item Creation] You can create magic items that are imbued with a connection to your deity. Prerequisite: Any other item creation feat. Benefit: You can craft relics—magic items that rely on a divine connection to a specific deity to function.  True Believer Your deity rewards your unquestioning faith and devotion. Prerequisite: Must choose a single deity to worship. Must be within one step of that deity’s alignment. Benefit: Once per day when you are about to attempt a saving throw, you can declare that you are using this feat to gain a +2 insight bonus on that saving throw. This feat also allows you to use a relic of the deity you worship without sacrificing a spell slot.     222  620_10762_Chp6.indd 222  12/21/06 5:53:25 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  • In exchange for a great service to the church, a PC could be awarded the use of a relic—perhaps in place of a monetary reward of similar value. This loan might be a reward for a task already completed, or a tool provided to accomplish a newly acquired quest. • The Sanctify Relic feat (see sidebar) allows a character to craft a relic for which he meets the requirements. While the prerequisite for this feat (any other item creation feat) is easy for any caster to meet, a DM could introduce story-based requirements or ramifications for a character who wants to craft such an item. Certainly, any local church dedicated to the same deity would take an interest in a character who suddenly appears with a shiny new relic.  Creating Relics for Your Campaign  RUNESTAFFS Hennet stepped boldly toward the red dragon Azymondian, who gave an evil chuckle. Thanks to its well-placed agents, the dragon knew full well that the sorcerer’s best weapons—his spells of fire—would be useless. “You don’t really think that your precious wall of fire can hold me back, do you?”  Illus. by R. Spencer  The relics in this book are based on the deities of the core D&D pantheon, but they don’t have to be. Moradin’s axe of ancestral virtue works just as well for any dwarven deity you create yourself—or any warlike but good deity, for that matter. If you create your own relic, price the base item—that is, the effect available to a character who doesn’t have the True Believer feat and chooses not to sacrifice a divine spell slot—just as you would any other magic item. The relic’s special power, however, should be virtually free—rather than assessing a gp cost, the “cost” to the character is the spell slot or feat required to unlock the power. The key is to balance the lost spell slot against the potency of the relic’s special power or powers. A relic that requires a character to sacrifice a 4th-level spell should provide a power roughly equivalent to (or maybe a little bit better than) a typical 4th-level spell. Such a power shouldn’t simply be a single daily use of another 4th-level spell—after all, the character could just have prepared that spell in the sacrificed spell slot. Instead, it should be something that the character couldn’t do with a spell slot of that level. Mialee researches ancient lore to create a new magic item  Hennet smiled back. “You’re right, dragon, it won’t.” Then he reached into his bag of holding and drew forth a pale wooden staff chased with silver runes and tipped at each end with a glittering diamond. “But as my uncle used to say, sometimes what you know isn’t as limiting as you think.”     BEHIND THE CURTAIN: RELICS Relics are somewhat more complex than standard magic items, but they don’t require a player to learn any complicated new systems. Many have magical effects that no spell duplicates exactly, which gives them the feel of “artifacts on the cheap,” but their overall power level isn’t out of line with other magic items in the game. As originally presented, most relics were extraordinarily expensive—a fact that effectively designated them as usable only by high-level characters. An unfortunate side effect of the high price, however, was that by the time the average cleric or paladin could “afford” to find a relic dedicated to his deity—that is, by the time such a valuable item was reasonable to recover in an enemy’s treasure hoard—the character probably already had a more expensive and powerful item filling a similar niche. The  axe of ancestral virtue, for example, originally had a price similar to a +5 weapon, but by the time a character could reasonably “find” the axe, he probably already had a better weapon, so he’d have to sell his existing weapon to “make room” for the axe. And many players just aren’t interested in selling an expensive, powerful item in order to make room for another item—even if the second item is more flavorful. To make relics more palatable to characters, we have reduced their prices so that they can show up earlier in the campaign— often even before a character is experienced enough to unlock their extra powers, so that they can “grow” along with the character. In some cases, this tactic required us to reduce the relic’s power as well, but in many cases the extra ability a dedicated wielder gets is better than what the item previously provided.     223  620_10762_Chp6.indd 223  12/21/06 5:53:27 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  The dragon howled in pain and surprise as great hailstones pounded down upon it from the sky above. If it survived this battle, it vowed, it would take great pleasure in devouring its “well-placed agents.”  • If the spell has any other prerequisite required to cast it (such as an alignment or racial restriction), you must meet the prerequisite to cast the spell from a runestaff.  A runestaff allows its wielder to use her own arcane energy to generate magical effects. Typically, a runestaff has anywhere from two to five spells. By expending a prepared arcane spell or arcane spell slot, the wielder can cast a spell of the same level or lower from the runestaff’s list, as long as that spell also appears on the wielder’s class spell list. The spell is treated exactly as if the wielder cast the spell herself, including caster level, save DC, and any other effects related to the spell. Unless stated otherwise in the runestaff’s description, each spell can be cast from a runestaff three times per day. Example: Mialee wields a runestaff of frost, which holds ice storm, wall of ice, and cone of cold. She can sacrifice a prepared dimension door (a 4th-level spell) to cast either ice storm or wall of ice, since those are 4th-level wizard spells. If she sacrificed a prepared teleport (a 5th-level spell), she could cast any of the staff’s three spells (since they are all 5th level or lower on the wizard spell list). Example: Hofgren the hexblade (CW 5) could sacrifice a 2ndlevel spell slot to cast suggestion from a runestaff of enchantment, since that’s a 2nd-level hexblade spell. He couldn’t use the staff’s crushing despair, mind fog, or mass suggestion spells, since those aren’t on the hexblade spell list. In order to use a runestaff, you must attune yourself to it as part of your preparation or readying of arcane spells. You can’t attune yourself to more than one runestaff at a time; attuning yourself to a second runestaff breaks your previous attunement. Activating a runestaff (that is, casting a spell from it) is almost like casting the spell yourself, including casting time and even provoking attacks of opportunity. You must supply any components or costs normally required by the spell cast from the runestaff, just as if you had cast it yourself. • If the spell has a verbal component, activating the runestaff requires you to perform that verbal component (and thus the spell can’t be cast if you’re incapable of speaking). • If the spell has a somatic component, you don’t need to have an extra hand free; simply manipulating the staff can meet the requirement (though arcane spell failure chance still applies). • If the spell has a material component or focus, you must supply it as part of the casting. For example, if a runestaff held stoneskin, you’d have to supply 250 gp of diamond dust each time you cast that spell from the runestaff. • If a spell has an XP component, you must pay it each time you use a runestaff to cast that spell.  You can apply the effect of metamagic feats that you know to spells from a runestaff, but you must expend a spell whose level equals or exceeds the adjusted level of the affected spell. Continuing the example given above, Mialee could apply her Empower Spell feat to the runestaff’s ice storm, but she’d have to sacrifice a prepared spell of 6th level or higher (since Empower Spell adds two to the spell’s level). A runestaff appears essentially identical to a normal staff of the same name, though it always bears arcane runes (large and bold on some staffs, faint on others) that reveal its name and the spells it holds to anyone who uses read magic or succeeds on a DC 20 Spellcraft check. Runestaffs appear in Chapter 4: Tools.  Creating New Runestaffs If you want to create a runestaff of your own design, it should have two to five arcane spells associated with it, and the spells should be thematically linked in some way. The lowest-level spell in a runestaff should be at least 3rd level. Crafting a runestaff requires the Craft Staff feat, along with any spells held by the runestaff. You don’t need to supply any material components or foci required by the spells in a runestaff, nor do you need to pay any XP cost required by the spells, since the wielder of the staff pays those costs. To set the price of a runestaff, multiply the level of the highest-level spell in the runestaff by itself, then by 400 gp. For each additional spell in the runestaff, square that spell’s level and multiply by 200 gp. Add the values together to find the final price of the runestaff. If a spell can be used less than three times per day, reduce the gp multiplier for that spell by 100 per use below three (or 50 per use below three, for spells after the first). Example: Steve’s sorcerer wants to invent the runestaff of speedy travel, which would provide dimension door (4th), fly (3rd), and expeditious retreat (1st). The price for this item would be 6,400 (4 × 4 × 400) plus 1,800 (3 × 3 × 200) plus 200 (1 × 1 × 200), or 8,400 gp. If he only wanted to be able to use dimension door once per day, the price would be reduced to 6,800 gp (4 × 4 × 200 gp for dimension door, plus the other costs as normal).  SYNERGY PROPERTIES Some of the armor, shield, and weapon properties described in Chapters 1 and 2 include the term [Synergy] after their names. A synergy property has a prerequisite, much as a feat does. Specifically, the item must already possess another particular     BEHIND THE CURTAIN: RUNESTAFFS A runestaff allows an arcane spellcaster to augment her normal versatility without relying on charged items or simply adding more spells or spell-like abilities per day. Since a runestaff relies on the character’s own spell slots to provide power, its price might seem artificially low. However, although increased versatility can result in a powerful character, it typically does so indirectly (by rewarding good strategy and character-building) rather than directly (by  simply increasing the power of existing abilities or granting entirely new abilities). In general, runestaffs are priced so that they are most likely to appear in a character’s hands shortly after he becomes capable of casting spells of the item’s highest level. A runestaff of fire, for example, costs 8,400 gp. That’s nearly half of the average character wealth for a 7th-level character (the minimum level to cast 4th-level spells), so it’s likely out of his price range. By 9th level, though, it’s only a quarter of the character’s expected wealth, and well within reach.     224  620_10762_Chp6.indd 224  12/21/06 5:53:31 AM  Table 6–1: Variant Synergy Abilities (Armor/Shield)  Weapon Property Flaming burst Icy burst Shocking burst  Prerequisite Property Flaming Frost Shock  Base Price Modifier +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus  property before a synergy ability can be added to it. Otherwise, synergy abilities function the same as any other armor or weapon property. Despite the requirements for adding synergy abilities to armor and weapons, most adventurers consider them well worth the cost. These properties allow you to upgrade a favored ability of an item over time, rather than paying for it all at once. Synergy properties always replace their prerequisite property. Many synergy properties expand upon or improve the prerequisite property, and others both subsume the prerequisite property and add new abilities. To determine a synergy item’s effective enhancement bonus (and thus its aura strength and overall gp value), add together the bonus equivalent of the synergy property, the bonus equivalent of the synergy prerequisite property, the item’s enhancement bonus, and any bonus equivalents for other properties the item has. However, after adding a synergy property, the item loses its synergy prerequisite abilities.  CHAPTER 6  Table 6–2: Variant Synergy Abilities (Weapons)  USING MAGIC ITEMS  Armor/Shield Prerequisite Base Price Property Property Modifier Energy resistance, Energy resistance +24,000 gp improved* Energy resistance, Energy resistance, +24,000 gp greater* improved Fortification, Fortification, light +2 bonus moderate Fortification, heavy Fortification, moderate +2 bonus +11,250 gp Shadow, improvedA Shadow Shadow, improved +18,750 gp Shadow, greaterA Silent moves, Silent moves +11,250 gp improvedA Silent moves, greaterA Silent moves, improved +18,750 gp Slick +11,250 gp Slick, improvedA Slick, improved +18,750 gp Slick, greaterA Spell resistance (15) Spell resistance (13) +1 bonus Spell resistance (17) Spell resistance (15) +1 bonus Spell resistance (19) Spell resistance (17) +1 bonus *Includes acid, cold, electricity, fire, and sonic resistance. A: Property only applies to armor.  For example, +1 greater anchoring full plate has a total effective enhancement bonus of +3 (+1 enhancement + 1 anchoring + 1 greater anchoring), with a value of 9,170 gp and an aura strength equal to that of +3 full plate. However, +1 greater anchoring full plate does not still give its wearer the anchoring property’s +5 bonus on checks to resist being tripped, overrun, or bull rushed. It instead gives the wearer the greater anchoring property’s benefit (a +10 bonus on such checks). A synergy property still counts as any of its synergy prerequisite properties for the purpose of qualifying an item for still more synergy properties. For example, a +1 acidic burst longsword is still considered a corrosive weapon for the purpose of qualifying to receive the energy surge synergy property (see Chapter 2 for details on these weapon properties). Many existing armor and weapon properties could be considered synergy abilities; see Tables 6–1 and 6–2 for some options. This doesn’t really change the end price of the armor or weapon, but it creates an inexpensive starting point and obvious upgrade path to reach what would otherwise be an exceptionally expensive end point. Typically, these synergy abilities supersede or simply replace the prerequisite property.  MAGIC ITEM SETS Magic item sets (Chapter 5) use an expanded version of the normal magic item format to present their information. The new portions of the set descriptions are described below. Introduction: A short introductory paragraph follows the set’s title. This paragraph introduces the set in a general way. The paragraph that follows describes the types of characters who will likely find the set useful. Lore: The Lore section includes DCs for Knowledge and bardic knowledge checks, as well as the information the DM should impart when a PC meets or exceeds the DC. A character who meets or exceeds a result gets all the information given for lower DCs. The lowest DC typically gives the item set’s general history. The next higher DC tells a little more about that history, and the DC after that reveals some secret that might be important to a PC collecting the set. The highest DC provided should tell a PC where a piece of the set was last known to have been used, and perhaps who possessed it. As a DM, you should use such a result to spur adventure. As with all Knowledge and bardic knowledge checks, a PC cannot take 20 or retry the check, but a PC who wants more information than the check result provided can spend additional time to research more about the item or try to find someone with more knowledge. Tables: Two tables accompany each item set description. The Pieces and Abilities table summarizes the items in the set, their costs, the item slots they use, and their abilities. You can look at     DAMAGE AND REPAIR Unless otherwise noted, a magic item can be damaged just like any other object, but they are often more durable than nonmagical objects. Magic armor, shields, and weapons, for example, add 2 to their hardness and gain 10 hit points for each +1 of enhancement bonus. Other magic items have hardness and hit points normal for their material and item type, though exceptions can exist. A magic item’s save bonus (for all saves) equals 2 + 1/2 its caster level (rounded down). An intelligent magic item (DMG 268) also adds its Wisdom bonus on Will saves. That said, a magic item doesn’t even need to attempt a saving throw against a harmful effect unless it meets one of three criteria:  • It is unattended; • It is specifically targeted by an effect (such as a shatter spell); or • Its wielder rolls a natural 1 on his save against an effect that can harm objects. A damaged magic item continues to function (and can be repaired) as long as it has at least 1 hit point. If reduced to 0 hit points, it is destroyed and all its magical power lost forever. It costs no more to repair a magic item with the Craft skill (PH 70) than it does to repair its nonmagical counterpart. The make whole spell also repairs a damaged—but not destroyed— magic item.     225  620_10762_Chp6.indd 225  12/21/06 5:53:32 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  this table to tell at a glance if the item set is something in which a character might be interested. The Collection Benefits table summarizes the abilities granted by collecting the sets and the number of items necessary to gain each collection benefit. Collection Benefits: This section of the set’s description tells you how each collection benefit works. Where necessary, the collection benefits describe the necessary action type, caster level, and so on. Pieces of the Set: The individual items in the set follow, presented in the format used throughout Magic Item Compendium.  Creating Magic Item Sets Each magic item set began with one original set. That original set was created or discovered in some legendary fashion, but now others can copy the items in the set so long as they have a piece of a set to work from. If your character has a piece of a set, he can create (or have someone else create) any other piece of the set using the normal magic item creation rules. He doesn’t need to find one of the original set’s pieces to make his own; any piece he finds can function as the genesis for recreating the entire set. He might also add other properties to items in the set using the rules found in the Dungeon Master’s Guide and on page 233 of this book. You cannot alter or add to an item set’s collection benefits.  Collecting Magic Item Sets Because a character must first have a piece of the set to create more, DMs can control the introduction of the sets and their prevalence in the world. Once a set piece is introduced, a character might be able to create the other pieces or pay for them to be created. Depending on how prevalent the set is, it might be possible to purchase a piece. However, if a PC is interested in collecting a set, a DM should consider placing additional pieces in treasure hoards and allowing PCs to discover them based on rumors of their use. A PC can usually obtain the first item of a set at a relatively low level, collecting more expensive set pieces as he advances. Each piece of a set has an item level, allowing a DM to know at a glance when an item in a set is appropriate for the PCs in his campaign.  ITEM LEVELS  This book assigns a level rating to each magic item, based on the item’s market price. This is not the same as an item’s caster level. Instead, the level rating of a magic item is a tool for the DM. Whether you’re creating a monster’s treasure hoard, building an NPC opponent, or crafting a player character above 1st level, choosing the appropriate magic items to include is crucial, and each item’s level helps you do exactly that. Mechanically, an item’s level has no bearing on the game. It doesn’t tell you (except indirectly) how potent the item is, how much damage it deals, or how difficult it is to suppress or dispel its effects. Currently, the game assigns a budget of gold pieces based on the level of a monster, NPC, or PC to “spend” for that creature’s treasure hoard or personal gear. This system is precise and monetarily efficient—it encourages you to spend every last gp allotted—but it’s also slow. When you need to equip a bunch of NPCs in a hurry, or you just want a playable PC for tonight’s game, you might reasonably choose for speed to take precedence over precision. Even if you’re not choosing items randomly, the random tables in Appendix 2 provide a list of all items in this book and the DMG sorted by item level.  The item level system retains most of the economy of magic items, but replaces the precision of market price with the abstraction of level. A cloak of resistance +1, pipes of the sewers, and a divine scroll of slay living are all 4th-level magic items, even though their market prices are slightly different. Coincidentally, an item’s level also provides a useful guideline to the DM as to when such an item becomes appropriate for the PCs. In general, PCs should own items of their own character level or lower. Small exceptions to this general guideline exist—a 12th-level magic item is okay in the hands of a 10th-level PC—but straying too far can cause trouble. Be warned that this system consciously trades precision for speed. It allows you to equip a character quickly, but it doesn’t necessarily spend every last gold piece available, nor does it exactly replicate what you could purchase with the “normal” systems available. When creating an important NPC, building a player character’s equipment list for a long-term campaign, or designing a treasure hoard (see page 265), consider using the normal rules in place of these.  Table 6–3: Item Levels by Price Item Level 1/2  Market Price Range (gp) 1–50  1st  51–150  2nd  151–400  3rd  401–800  4th 5th  801–1,300 1,301–1,800  6th 7th 8th  1,801–2,300 2,301–3,000 3,001–4,000  9th 10th 11th 12th 13th  4,001–5,000 5,001–6,500 6,501–8,000 8,001–10,000 10,001–13,000  14th  13,001–18,000  15th  18,001–25,000  16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21th 22th 23th 24th 25th 26th 27th  25,001–35,000 35,001–48,000 48,001–64,000 64,001–80,000 80,001–100,000 100,001–120,000 120,001–140,000 140,001–160,000 160,001–180,000 180,001–200,000 200,001–220,000 220,001–240,000  28th 29th 30th  240,001–260,000 260,001–280,000 280,001–300,000  Sample Items potion or scroll (1st-level spell), alchemist’s fire masterwork armor, scroll (2nd-level spell) masterwork weapon, potion (2nd-level spell) wand (1st-level spell), potion (3rd-level spell) +1 armor brooch of shielding, full plate armor +1 weapon cloak of elvenkind +2 armor, gauntlets of ogre power wand (2nd-level spell) boots of striding and springing +2 weapon +3 armor boots of speed, wand (3rd-level spell) +3 weapon, +4 armor, gloves of Dexterity +4 +5 armor, wand (4th-level spell) +4 weapon amulet of health +6 +5 weapon robe of the archmagi amulet of mighty fists +4 robe of eyes holy avenger efreeti bottle staff of passage +5 vorpal weapon staff of power ring of elemental immunity (ELH) boots of swiftness (ELH) staff of mighty force (ELH) mantle of epic spell resistance (ELH)  226  620_10762_Chp6.indd 226  12/21/06 5:53:34 AM  SETTING AN ITEM’S LEVEL  Selecting equipment for an NPC is similar to building a treasure hoard, with two significant exceptions: • Each NPC’s gear includes multiple items specifically useful to that character; and • Most of an NPC’s treasure takes the form of equipment. Thus, equipping an NPC with this system is a bit more complicated than just building a hoard, but it’s still faster than accounting for every last gold piece using the standard method. Because NPC gear value doesn’t scale at the same rate at low levels and at high levels, use one of the following methods depending on the NPC’s level: NPC Level 1st–6th: Assign items as shown below. NPC Level 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th  Item Levels 2, 1, 1 3, 3, 2 4, 3, 2 4, 3, 2, 2 5, 4, 3 5, 4, 4, 3  Item Levels 19, 18, 17, 16, 15, 14 20, 19, 18, 17 20, 19, 18, 17, 16 20, 20, 19, 18 21, 20, 19, 18 21, 20, 19, 18, 17 22, 21, 20, 19 23, 22, 21, 20 24, 23, 22, 21 25, 24, 23, 22  When choosing gear for an NPC, start with the most important items that he needs in the encounter. For example, an NPC fighter should pick his armor and weapon before making any other selections. This ensures that the character has what he needs to keep up with the PCs in a fight. You should select most or all of an NPC’s magic items rather than generating them randomly—random rolls can too easily result in an opponent without any useful combat items. A single randomly generated magic item can add a little spice to an encounter, though, as well as suggesting a new tactic or unusual strategy for the character. If needed, your NPC can trade up to gain a more powerful item or trade down to increase the number of items he has. Trading the NPC’s weakest item for multiple scrolls or potions is a good way to give the character a few more interesting options in combat. See Equipping a PC, below, for details. In addition to equipment, each NPC should carry approximately 100 gp worth of nonequipment treasure per character level (in the form of gold, gems, jewelry, and the like).  CHAPTER 6  EQUIPPING AN NPC  NPC Level 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th  USING MAGIC ITEMS  An item’s market price determines its level. Find the market price range on Table 6–3: Item Levels by Price in which this value falls; this tells you its level. For example, a cloak of elvenkind has a market price of 2,500 gp. This falls between 2,301 gp and 3,000 gp, which makes the cloak a 7th-level magic item. Fast-Play Exception: For magic weapons and armor, it’s easiest to ignore the portion of market price derived from the masterwork item itself, as long as that’s just a small fraction of the overall price. For example, treat a +1 greatsword (2,350 gp) as a 6th-level item, even though its actual market price is a little bit above that range. Don’t abuse this shortcut by claiming that +1 full plate (2,650 gp market price) is only a 4th-level item (801–1,300 gp).  NPC Level 21st and up: Assign items as shown below.  pqqqqqqqqqrs NPC Level 7th–20th: Starting two levels below the NPC’s character level, select one item per level until you have five magic items. Then choose one additional item two levels below the NPC’s level. For example, a 12th-level NPC wizard would select one item per level of 6th through 10th level, plus an extra 10th-level item. See the table below. NPC Level 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th  Item Levels 5, 5, 4, 3, 2, 1 6, 6, 5, 4, 3, 2 7, 7, 6, 5, 4, 3 8, 8, 7, 6, 5, 4 9, 9, 8, 7, 6, 5 10, 10, 9, 8, 7, 6 11, 11, 10, 9, 8, 7 12, 12, 11, 10, 9, 8 13, 13, 12, 11, 10, 9 14, 14, 13, 12, 11, 10 15, 15, 14, 13, 12, 11 16, 16, 15, 14, 13, 12 17, 17, 16, 15, 14, 13 18, 18, 17, 16, 15, 14  USED WANDS Particularly when equipping an NPC, affording a fully charged wand can be difficult. Since the typical NPC won’t have a chance to use more than a few wand charges in any combat, consider equipping such characters with partially used wands—that is, wands with fewer than full charges. This is also a good way to put a cheap wand into a treasure hoard, and you can even allow PCs to select a wand or two this way as well. Use the table below to assign an item level for less than fully charged wands. Wand (Charges) 1st-level spell (10) 1st-level spell (20) 2nd-level spell (10) 2nd-level spell (20) 3rd-level spell (10) 3rd-level spell (20) 4th-level spell (10) 4th-level spell (20)  Item Level 1st 2nd 4th 5th 6th 9th 8th 11th  pqqqqqqqqqrs  227  620_10762_Chp6.indd 227  12/21/06 5:53:35 AM  Illus. by D. Allsop  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  Magic item creation requires much knowledge and many ingredients, some of them quite unsavory  EQUIPPING A PC This system also lets you quickly select gear for a player character above 2nd level. It’s not quite as accurate as the normal system, but the variation is typically no more than a couple percentage points from normal. Starting at the PC’s character level, select two items of each level all the way down to 1st level. For example, a 5th-level PC would have two 5th-level items, two 4th-level items, two 3rd-level items, two 2nd-level items, and two 1st-level items. Just as when equipping an NPC, pick the most important items first, filling out with the less crucial gear at the end of the process. You can also allow the PC to take a lower-level item in place of a higher-level item. If you can’t find a 12th-level item that interests you, you can always take an item of 11th level or lower in its place. You can trade multiple individual items for a single, higher-level item. Generally, this isn’t as efficient (you get less total value than what you give up), but the increased potency of the higher-level item is often worth it. The reverse is also true: To gain additional, weaker items you can trade a single higher-level item. See Table 6–4: Item Level Equivalencies, and use the following guidelines: • To trade down, use the left-hand column to find the item you’re giving up, then read across to see what two items you get in return. • To trade up, use the right-hand column to find the pair of items you’re giving up, then read across to see the single item you get in return.  Table 6–4: Item Level Equivalencies One Item of This Level 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th or 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th or 18th 19th 20th 21st or 22nd 23rd or 24th 25th or 26th 27th or 28th 29th 30th  Equals Two Items of This Level 1/2 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd  228  620_10762_Chp6.indd 228  12/21/06 5:53:36 AM  PLACING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  USING MAGIC ITEMS  Including magic items as part of a treasure is a vital task of the DM; it’s also delicate and difficult. It can be tempting to hand out powerful or particularly interesting items too soon or too often. (Some DMs make the opposite mistake, being too stingy and handing out too few magic items.) A single overpowering item can ruin a whole campaign—but if the PCs don’t get enough magic items, they won’t be powerful enough to deal with the challenges that have been balanced for characters of their level. The random magic item tables in Appendix 2 were designed to help in this regard. Frequently, however, you’ll want to give your players items you have hand-picked as especially suitable for their characters. Feel free to do this more and more as you gain experience as a DM and—most important—as you become familiar with what items can and can’t do. Remember that magic items can and probably will be used by the NPCs who own them. If an orc chief has a +2 longsword in his treasure hoard, he is likely to use it in his battle with the PCs. Creatures such as a medusa or a lammasu might be able to use certain items, such as a necklace of adaptation, and even a dragon can drink a potion. See Size and Shape, page 219, for advice on how to handle odd-shaped creatures using magic items. When placing magic items, keep two important numbers in mind. First is the expected treasure value for the monster or challenge overcome, as described on Table 3–3: Treasures Values  per Encounter on page 51 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide and also on Table 6–8: Sample Treasures. Obviously, you shouldn’t place items worth significantly more than a monster’s expected treasure value without a good reason; otherwise you’re overrewarding the characters (and contributing to unnecessary power inflation). Similarly, if more than half of a monster’s treasure consists of a single item, this can lead to arguments over whether any character “deserves” to get such a valuable item when the others get little or nothing. (Of course, if you have a lot of hoards like this, the total equals out over time, but make sure that your players recognize this to be true.) Finding items that fall in an appropriate price range is much easier if you use the lists of item levels by price found in Appendix 1. The second important value is the recommended wealth of PCs based on their level. Table 6–9: Character Wealth by Level reproduces this information, which was previously presented in the Dungeon Master’s Guide and Epic Level Handbook, collecting it in one location for easy reference. When you place magic items, anything worth less than 5% of a PC’s expected wealth often falls below his notice—not only is it probably too weak to be useful, but it’s barely even worth writing down on the loot list for sale later. Exceptions exist, to be sure—an 8th-level fighter won’t pass up a potion of cure serious wounds—but even these exceptions aren’t very exciting. Conversely, an item worth more than 50% of a character’s expected wealth is almost certainly too big a chunk to swallow all at once; most PCs are sorely tempted to sell such an item to buy multiple cheaper items (and you’re also probably     UPGRADING ITEMS: AN EFFICIENT ALTERNATIVE Many of a character’s most common items aren’t gained (or purchased) as single, discrete items, but rather upgraded over the course of many levels. This category includes weapons, armor, ability-score boosters, and any other item with a bonus that can be improved from its starting value. When a player character selects any of these items, you have two options: the fast option or the efficient option. The fast option simply assigns the item a level based on its total market price—a +3 longsword (18,315 gp) is a 14th-level item. This approach is quick, easy, and allows you to move quickly from item to item. A more efficient (and favorable) approach is to pay for the item with multiple weaker item slots—sort of like buying it on an installment plan. This mimics the actual method by which most characters get their hands on magic items with high bonuses—by paying smaller quantities of gold repeatedly over the course of multiple levels to increase the item from its most basic form to its more powerful form. After all, that +3 longsword might have started as a +1 longsword (and a masterwork longsword before that) and only achieved its current enhancement bonus because someone paid a wizard to improve it. To use the efficient option, choose the table appropriate to your item, then find the bonus in the left-hand column. The corresponding numbers in the right-hand column indicate the lower-level items that you can “sacrifice” in place of the normal item level slot. Using the +3 longsword as an example, rather than selecting it as a 14th-level item, you could pay for it with a 6th-level slot (which represents the +1 longsword you started with), a 10th-level slot (representing the sword’s improvement from +1 to +2), and a 12th-level slot (the final improvement from +2 to +3).  Table 6–5: Armor, Shields, and Resistance Bonus Bonus Item Level Breakdown +2 8 (7 + 4) +3 12 (9 + 7 + 4) +4 14 (10 + 9 + 7 + 4) +5 15 (12 + 10 + 9 + 7 + 4) +6* 17 (13 + 12 + 10 + 9 + 7 + 4) +7* 18 (13 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 9 + 7 + 4) +8* 19 (14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 9 + 7 + 4) +9* 20 (15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 9 + 7 + 4) +10* 21 (16 + 15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 9 + 7 + 4) *Refers to armor or shield’s total effective bonus, including special properties.  Table 6–6: Weapon, Deflection Bonus, or Natural Armor Bonus Bonus Item Level Breakdown +2 11 (10 + 6) +3 14 (12 + 10 + 6) +4 16 (13 + 12 + 10 + 6) +5 18 (14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 6) +6* 19 (15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 6) +7* 21 (15 + 15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 6) +8* 23 (16 + 15 + 15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 6) +9* 25 (17 + 16 + 15 + 15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 6) +10* 27 (17 + 17 + 16 + 15 + 15 + 14 + 13 + 12 + 10 + 6) *Refers to weapon’s total effective bonus, including special properties.  Table 6–7: Ability Score Bonus Bonus +4 +6  Item Level Breakdown 13 + 8 15 + 13 + 8     229  620_10762_Chp6.indd 229  12/21/06 5:53:39 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  Table 6–8: Sample Treasures Encounter Level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20  Treasure/ Encounter 300 gp 600 gp 900 gp 1,200 gp 1,600 gp 2,000 gp 2,600 gp 3,400 gp 4,500 gp 5,800 gp 7,500 gp 9,800 gp 13,000 gp 17,000 gp 22,000 gp 28,000 gp 36,000 gp 47,000 gp 61,000 gp 80,000 gp  Sample Treasure (Low Magic) Level 1/2; 250 gp Level 1; 450 gp Level 1; 750 gp Level 2; 800 gp Level 2; 1,200 gp Level 2; 1,600 gp Level 3; 1,800 gp Level 3; 2,600 gp Level 4; 3,200 gp Level 4; 4,500 gp Level 5; 5,700 gp Level 6; 7,600 gp Level 7; 10,000 gp Level 8; 13,000 gp Level 9; 17,000 gp Level 10; 21,500 gp Level 12; 26,000 gp Level 13; 34,000 gp Level 13; 48,000 gp Level 14; 62,000 gp  faced with the “do you deserve this item” argument described earlier, not to mention the power inflation issue). As an example, it’s just as inappropriate to place a suit of +5 full plate in the nest of an ettercap as it is to place a +1 longsword in the hoard of a beholder. In the former case, the item is well beyond the recommended treasure value for a creature of the ettercap’s Challenge Rating, as well as significantly higher than the expected total wealth of any PC who would fi nd the ettercap a challenging opponent. In the latter case, not only is the weapon a relatively insignificant portion of a beholder’s average treasure hoard, it’s unlikely that any PC involved in the beholder’s defeat will find such a weak magic item useful enough to keep. You’re better off just including a piece of jewelry worth a similar amount, or at least a couple of scrolls or potions that are likely to find use. A useful tool introduced by this book to help you place appropriately valued magic items is the concept of item levels (see page 226). That section includes advice on placing magic items in treasure hoards as well as in the hands of NPCs.  Sample Treasure (Half Magic) Level 1; 150 gp Level 1, 1; 300 gp Level 2; 500 gp Level 2, 1; 600 gp Level 3; 800 gp Level 3, 1; 1,050 gp Level 4; 1,300 gp Level 5; 1,600 gp Level 6; 2,300 gp Level 7; 2,800 gp Level 8; 3,500 gp Level 9; 4,800 gp Level 10; 6,500 gp Level 11; 9,000 gp Level 12; 12,000 gp Level 13; 15,000 gp Level 14; 18,000 gp Level 15; 22,000 gp Level 16; 31,000 gp Level 17; 40,000 gp  Sample Treasure (All Magic) Level 1, 1 Level 2, 1 Level 3, 1 Level 4 Level 5 Level 6 Level 7 Level 8 Level 9 Level 10 Level 11 Level 12 Level 13 Level 14 Level 15 Level 16 Level 17 Level 18 Level 19 Level 20  CHOOSING THE RIGHT ITEMS Placing magic items in a treasure hoard is more than just crunching numbers. It doesn’t do much good to put in items worth the right amount if none of the PCs finds them interesting enough to keep. Players are often coldly and brutally efficient in rating the perceived value of magic items found in a dungeon. No matter how lovingly crafted or integral to your world’s history an item might be, if it doesn’t fit the needs of any of the characters, it’s going up for sale. To increase the odds of a magic item finding its way into a character’s list of gear, think carefully about the kinds of tactics your players (and their characters) prefer. If Neil’s fighter is extremely risk-averse, chances are he favors defensive items that boost his AC or saving throws. On the other hand, since Viet’s paladin values offensive might over everything else, he’s always looking for ways to increase the amount of damage he deals. Even though both characters fill a similar role in the party, the same magic item won’t necessarily appeal equally. Neil’s more likely     BEHIND THE CURTAIN: HOW IT WORKS In this system, each item represents roughly half of the total net treasure a PC gains in the course of achieving the item’s level. The top end of each level’s market value range was created by subtracting a character’s expected gear of level N–1 from that of level N—that is, the net treasure gained by the character in achieving the item’s level—then halving the result. For example, a 6th-level item (1,801–2,300 gp) has a value equal to one-half the difference between the wealth of a 5th-level character and a 6thlevel character (13,000 – 9,000 = 4,000 gp). Assigning a PC’s gear, then, is a simple process of selecting which two items he gained at each of his levels. This is an abstraction, to be sure—PCs don’t necessarily gain magic items at such a steady rate—but it works reasonably well when speed is your primary goal.  Since NPCs don’t accumulate treasure at the same rate as PCs (if they did, every NPC of your level you defeated would double your treasure), they can’t use the same system for assigning gear. Nor does a one-size-fits-all system work at all levels, due to the uneven progression of NPC gear. This makes the ad hoc nature of the three systems described above necessary. In theory, you could use this system to buy many items that are low on the value range for a level and accidentally underequip your PC or NPC. However, the market price ranges are narrow enough that it’s unlikely your result will vary significantly from the normal organic nature of character wealth acquisition. If you are really worried about spending all of a character’s budget, you’re better off using the normal system for equipping a character.     230  620_10762_Chp6.indd 230  12/21/06 5:53:40 AM  Table 6–9: Character Wealth by Level NPC Wealth 900 gp 2,000 gp 2,500 gp 3,300 gp 4,300 gp 5,600 gp 7,200 gp 9,400 gp 12,000 gp 16,000 gp 21,000 gp 27,000 gp 35,000 gp 45,000 gp 59,000 gp 77,000 gp 100,000 gp 130,000 gp 170,000 gp 220,000 gp 240,000 gp 265,000 gp 290,000 gp 320,000 gp 350,000 gp 390,000 gp 430,000 gp 470,000 gp 520,000 gp 570,000 gp  to go after a ring of protection or minor cloak of displacement, while Viet’s eyes will light up when he sees the gauntlets of ogre power or belt of one mighty blow (see page 74). Neither of them is going to jump at the chance to don a hat of disguise, so why bother to include it in a dragon’s hoard? Avoid the temptation to second-guess your players, and don’t assume they know what might come in handy later in the campaign. Even though it’s clear to you that Chris’s wizard desperately needs an amulet of health for a few extra hit points, he might find the necklace of fireballs more fun. If you haven’t told the players that the next adventure will lead them to the Elemental Plane of Fire, is it any surprise that they prefer to sell the ring of fire resistance they just found? Don’t place an item whose only purpose is to replace a valuable item already possessed by one of the characters unless you’re sure it’s what the character wants. A +2 flaming morningstar might look better than the fighter’s +1 keen longsword at first glance, but if that fighter has Weapon Focus, really enjoys the longsword’s greater critical threat range, or expects to fight a lot of hell hounds in the near future, he’s not going to consider the morningstar to be “better” than his longsword, even if it might be demonstrably superior in many ways. Instead, place items that complement the fighter’s prized gear, such as augment crystals (see page 221), reusable items (such as the brute gauntlets on page 83), or low-priced one-shot items (such as oil of bless weapon). Not every magic item has to be a huge prize—plenty of fun, useful, and relatively inexpensive magic items can be found throughout this book. (In fact, this book has a higher concentration of such items than any other D&D resource to date.) Players would much rather find two interesting, useful 2,000-gp items  USING ITEM LEVELS To assign items quickly using item levels, compare the Encounter Level to Table 6–8: Sample Treasures. The table includes three columns: low magic (appropriate for creatures that neither use nor are likely to collect magic items), half magic (appropriate for creatures that might use an item or two, or who often encounter magic-wielding prey), or all magic (for monsters with the capability of easily turning gold into new items). Choose the column that best fits the type of hoard you want to create; when in doubt, use the middle column. If you want, you can replace a single magic item in the hoard with two weaker items. Beware of doing this too often—while it can provide variety in a treasure hoard, it also decreases the chance that a PC will find an item worth keeping and using. In a normal D&D campaign, items more than six levels below the PCs’ level aren’t usually very interesting. See Table 6–4: Item Level Equivalencies to see how to replace a single item with multiple, less powerful items. After you’ve determined the levels of the items in the hoard, go to the item tables in Appendix 2 to either randomly determine or handpick which items are present.  CHAPTER 6  PC Wealth see PH 111 900 gp 2,700 gp 5,400 gp 9,000 gp 13,000 gp 19,000 gp 27,000 gp 36,000 gp 49,000 gp 66,000 gp 88,000 gp 110,000 gp 150,000 gp 200,000 gp 260,000 gp 340,000 gp 440,000 gp 580,000 gp 760,000 gp 975,000 gp 1,200,000 gp 1,500,000 gp 1,800,000 gp 2,100,000 gp 2,500,000 gp 2,900,000 gp 3,300,000 gp 3,800,000 gp 4,300,000 gp  USING MAGIC ITEMS  Character Level 1st 2nd 3rd 4th 5th 6th 7th 8th 9th 10th 11th 12th 13th 14th 15th 16th 17th 18th 19th 20th 21st 22nd 23rd 24th 25th 26th 27th 28th 29th 30th  than an unexciting 4,000-gp item, even though the net gain is the same. Similarly, most adventuring parties are happier to find four useful 2,000-gp items than a single useful 8,000-gp item—the former option is a lot easier to split up among the characters than the latter.  RANDOM TREASURE Rolling random treasure values from Table 3–5: Treasure in the Dungeon Master’s Guide can be fun, but it’s also slow. The new random treasure tables in Appendix 2 collect all the items from this book and the Dungeon Master’s Guide in one place, produce treasure that is more consistent from encounter to encounter, and make treasure generation much faster.  BUYING AND SELLING MAGIC ITEMS  A player points to an item published in this book or the Dungeon Master’s Guide and asks, “Can I buy this?” The answer should usually be, “Yes.” Magic items are an important part of every character’s arsenal of abilities. Most monsters and encounters assume that characters have a certain amount of gear to make the challenge appropriate. Furthermore, at many levels magic items represent a character’s only option for customization; picking up a new magic ring or bag of potions is significantly more fun than allotting skill points. That’s not to say that you can’t apply occasional constraints to how and when magic items can be purchased, only that the constraints should be reasonable and shouldn’t prevent players from equipping their characters fairly. For instance, a character seeking a magic item should be in a community whose gold piece limit is equal to or greater than the cost of the desired item (see Table 6–10: Community GP Limits). You might also choose to limit particular items for campaign story reasons—maybe the knowledge of how to create certain items is a closely guarded secret of a particular group, or even forgotten to all. In general, though, you should allow characters with sufficient funds to equip themselves as they desire. Even the most thoughtfully constructed series of treasure hoards almost certainly fails  231  620_10762_Chp6.indd 231  12/21/06 5:53:41 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  Table 6–10: Community GP Limits PC Purchase Item PC Sale Town Size Limit Level† Limit** Thorp 40 gp 1/2 50 gp Hamlet 100 gp 1st 500 gp Village 200 gp 1st 5,000 gp Small town 800 gp 3rd 50,000 gp Large town 3,000 gp 7th 500,000 gp Small city 15,000 gp 14th no limit Large city 40,000 gp 17th no limit Metropolis 100,000 gp 21st no limit Metropolis, planar* 600,000 gp n/a no limit * As described in Epic Level Handbook (population 100,000+). † See “Item Levels” on page 226. (While the item levels given don’t precisely match the gp numbers given for each community, they’re close enough for DMs who just want easy reference.) ** This approximates the value derived by the formula presented under “Community Wealth and Population” on page 137 of the DMG.  to provide all your players the items they want to maximize their enjoyment as they advance in level.  WHERE TO BUY Large one-stop-shop “magic emporiums” are unrealistic and rare even in metropolis-sized cities. Instead, a community’s total stock of magic items for sale is widely distributed among dusty alchemist’s shops, bookstores, scribers’ boutiques, pawn shops, elixir brewers, the residences of retired adventurers, the old mage on the corner, curio shops, and so on. Except when you want to advance an adventure or campaign story arc, abstract the purchase of a particular magic item such that, given a few hours of effort asking around and tracking down the sought-for item, a PC finds and purchases the item she seeks if its market price is equal to or less than the town’s gp limit (given in the “PC Purchase Limit” column of Table 6–10: Community GP Limits). If time is an issue in the purchase of an item (for example, a pair of goggles of night is needed before nightfall), you might require the PC to attempt a Gather Information check to track the item down. Set the DC of the Gather Information check equal to the DC in the Aura entry of each item (which is equal to 15 + 1/2 the  item’s caster level). If the Gather Information check is successful, the PC finds the item within the time constraint. On a failed check, a PC can check again if time permits.  WHERE TO SELL As noted on page 112 of the Player’s Handbook, PCs can sell their loot for half its listed price. Just as described above under Where to Buy, PCs automatically fi nd a buyer willing to take their item (for half its market price) within an hour or two of asking around (or less, if they know the local curio shop takes all such oddities). Remember that partially depleted wands or similarly charged items are worth only a percentage of this value (equal to the percent of charges remaining; for example, a wand with 10 charges remaining is worth only 20% of the normal value). Generally, an item can’t be sold if half its listed price exceeds the community’s total amount of ready cash (noted in the “PC Sale Limit” column of Table 6–10: Community GP Limits), but you can allow the PCs a Gather Information check as described above to find a buyer with funds sufficient to take it off the PCs’ hands for one-fourth its market price (or the PC sale limit, whichever is lower).  CRAFTING MAGIC ITEMS  To create magic items, spellcasters use special feats. They invest time, money, and their own personal energy (in the form of experience points) in an item’s creation. This section reiterates the basics of magic item creation; for more details on creating the different types of magic items, see the information on item creation feats in Chapter 5 of the Player’s Handbook, as well as the appropriate sections in Chapter 7 of the Dungeon Master’s Guide. All items have prerequisites in their descriptions. These prerequisites must be met for the item to be created. Most of the time, they take the form of feats and spells that the item’s creator must know, although access through another magic item or spellcaster is allowed. It’s perfectly acceptable for two or more characters to work together to create a magic item, with each character supplying some of the prerequisites. (In all places where this text refers to the “creator” of a magic item, it includes all characters supplying at least one prerequisite for the item’s creation.) The XP cost must always be paid by the character who supplies the item creation feat required by the item, no matter how many other characters cooperate in its creation.     PSIONICS AND CRAFTING MAGIC ITEMS Many of the items in this book can also be created by a character with the appropriate psionic item creation feat. For the purpose of meeting item prerequisites, a character who has the Craft Psionic Arms and Armor feat is treated as having Craft Magic Arms and Armor. Likewise, a character who has Craft Universal Item meets the feat prerequisite for items that require Craft Wondrous Item. If an item includes a spell prerequisite, but the effect of the item does not directly implement that spell, then a psionic power of similar flavor can be substituted. If the item replicates a spell effect, then only the psionic version of that spell or a  psionic power that replicates the same effect can be used to satisfy the prerequisite. For example, a character can create a helm of teleportation using psionic teleport as a power prerequisite, or energy burst as a power to create a necklace of fireballs. The prerequisites of some items, such as the eldritch blast required for gauntlets of eldritch energy, have no psionic equivalent, and so cannot be created by a psionic character without the aid of a character who does meet the requirement. If you are using the Psionics Is Different variant (EPH 65), then an item created by a psionic character using a psionic item creation feat would be a psionic item. The guidelines given above should be used to determine the psionic item’s feat and power prerequisites.     232  620_10762_Chp6.indd 232  12/21/06 5:53:43 AM  You can add new magical abilities to a magic item with virtually no restrictions. The cost and prerequisites to do this are the same as if the item was not magical. Thus, a +1 longsword can be made into a +2 vorpal longsword, with the cost to create it being equal to that of a +2 vorpal longsword minus the cost of a +1 longsword  CHAPTER 6  IMPROVING MAGIC ITEMS  (98,315 – 2,315 = 96,000 gp). The character improving the magic item must meet the same prerequisites as if he were creating the item from scratch. It’s recommended that you add new magical abilities only to items that occupy the same body slot as the added effect would normally occupy. For example, it’s okay to add the power of boots of striding and springing to slippers of spider climbing, since both of those items occupy the same body slot. However, adding the power of boots of striding and springing to a cloak of resistance doesn’t make much sense. This isn’t a hard and fast rule, but it’s a reasonable guide that helps maintain some level of flavor and verisimilitude in the magic item system. In most cases, if the item is one that occupies a body slot, the cost of adding any additional ability to that item is 1-1/2 times the value of the added power (or the value of the added power plus 1/2 the value of the existing item, if the added power normally costs more than the existing item). For example, if a character adds the power to confer feather fall to her ring of jumping, the cost of adding this ability is 3,300 gp, the same as for creating a ring of feather falling × 1-1/2. On the other hand, if she were adding the power of a ring of force shield to that ring of jumping, the cost of adding the ability would be 9,750 gp (8,500 gp for the ring of force shield plus half of 2,500 gp, the price of a ring of jumping). This added cost doesn’t necessarily apply when adding some common effects to existing items; see below.  USING MAGIC ITEMS  The creator also needs a fairly quiet, comfortable, and well-lit place in which to work. Any place suitable for preparing spells (see Preparing Wizard Spells, PH 177) is suitable for making items. Creating an item requires one day per 1,000 gp in the item’s base price (rounding up), with a minimum of at least one day. Potions are an exception to this rule; they always take just one day to brew. The character must spend the gold and XP at the beginning of the construction process. The creator works for 8 hours each day. He cannot rush the process by working longer each day. But the days need not be consecutive, and the caster can use the rest of his time as he sees fit. A character who takes a break from item creation to adventure should keep track of how many days of work remain on the item currently being crafted. A character can work on only one item at a time. If a character starts work on a new item, all materials used and XP spent on the under-construction item are wasted. Magic supplies for items always cost half of the base price in gp and 1/25 of the base price in XP. For many items, the market price equals the base price. For example, a cloak of elvenkind has a market price (and base price) of 2,500 gp. Making one costs 1,250 gp in raw materials plus 100 XP. Armor, shields, weapons, and items with a value independent of their magically enhanced properties add their item cost to the market price. The item cost does not influence the base price (which determines the cost of magic supplies and the experience point cost), but it does increase the final market price.  Adding Common Item Effects to Existing Items One of the most frustrating roadblocks to using interesting, unusual magic items is that they take up body slots that you need for an ability-boosting item (such as gauntlets of ogre power), a ring of protection, or another must-have item. To address this issue, Magic Item Compendium presents official rules for adding common item effects to existing magic items.     BEHIND THE CURTAIN: PRICING MAGIC ITEMS This book intentionally does not present any detailed rules on pricing new magic items that you create. The Dungeon Master’s Guide provides various methods of estimating (and don’t underestimate the importance of that word in this task) gold piece values for simple magic items you design, but the very nature of magic item design in D&D doesn’t lend itself to hard-andfast rules for setting these prices. Any two items that replicate different spells can, and probably should, vary dramatically in price, even if the spell level and caster level are identical. (If that seems hard to believe, compare the value of a ring of invisibility with an item that allowed you to cast make whole at will.) On top of that, layer all the other interesting variations that magic items can have—alternative activation times, limited uses per day, situational restrictions on use, and so forth—and even the most diligently designed “system” of price determination can’t help but fall apart. The magic item prices in this book aren’t the result of any intricate formulas or detailed equations. Instead, each price is set individually by comparing the item (and more important, its likely perceived value to player characters) to other items commonly used by PCs. That last part bears emphasizing again: It  doesn’t do much good to say that a new item is worth about the same as a magnificent cape of divine eminence if the latter item is priced so exorbitantly that characters aren’t interested in buying or keeping it. Instead, compare new items to those that characters are already choosing and using—magic weapons and armor, rings of protection, cloaks of resistance, rings of invisibility, boots of striding and springing, and of course, the various ability-score boosters. If you want your characters to find a newly designed magic item compelling, make sure that it can compete with the obvious choice they would have otherwise made. If you compare the items in this book to those in other books (or particularly, with previously published versions of the same items in other books), you might be shocked at the price differences. Many of the items reproduced in this book have had their prices shaved or even slashed dramatically. Sometimes, that’s because we also reduced the overall effect of the item (so that it is available to a broader range of characters), but often the item is just as good as it always was but now costs 10%, 25%, or 50% less than it did before. That’s all just part of the same process of comparing new items to older, more popular items. In a way, it’s simple supply and demand—if characters weren’t buying sandals of sprinting, that likely means that they were just too expensive for their effect.     233  620_10762_Chp6.indd 233  12/21/06 5:53:44 AM  USING MAGIC ITEMS  CHAPTER 6  Table 6–11: Adding/Improving Common Item Effects Effect Body Slot* Prerequisites1 Price AC, +1 deflection bonus B, R, S shield of faith 2,000 gp AC, +1 to +2 deflection bonus B, R, S shield of faith 6,000 gp AC, +2 to +3 deflection bonus B, R, S shield of faith 10,000 gp AC, +3 to +4 deflection bonus B, R, S shield of faith 14,000 gp AC, +4 to +5 deflection bonus B, R, S shield of faith 18,000 gp A, B mage armor 1,000 gp AC, +1 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 3,000 gp AC, +1 to +2 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 5,000 gp AC, +2 to +3 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 7,000 gp AC, +3 to +4 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 9,000 gp AC, +4 to +5 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 11,000 gp AC, +5 to +6 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 13,000 gp AC, +6 to +7 armor bonus2 A, B mage armor 15,000 gp AC, +7 to +8 armor bonus2 AC, +1 enhancement bonus to natural armor B, To barkskin 2,000 gp AC, +1 to +2 enhancement bonus to natural armor B, To barkskin 6,000 gp AC, +2 to +3 enhancement bonus to natural armor B, To barkskin 10,000 gp AC, +3 to +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor B, To barkskin 14,000 gp AC, +4 to +5 enhancement bonus to natural armor B, To barkskin 18,000 gp Charisma, +2 enhancement bonus Hd, S eagle’s splendor 4,000 gp Charisma, +2 to +4 enhancement bonus Hd, S eagle’s splendor 12,000 gp Charisma, +4 to +6 enhancement bonus Hd, S eagle’s splendor 20,000 gp Constitution, +2 enhancement bonus Th, To, W bear’s endurance 4,000 gp Constitution, +2 to +4 enhancement bonus Th, To, W bear’s endurance 12,000 gp Constitution, +4 to +6 enhancement bonus Th, To, W bear’s endurance 20,000 gp Dexterity, +2 enhancement bonus A, Ft, Ha cat’s grace 4,000 gp Dexterity, +2 to +4 enhancement bonus A, Ft, Ha cat’s grace 12,000 gp Dexterity, +4 to +6 enhancement bonus A, Ft, Ha cat’s grace 20,000 gp Intelligence, +2 enhancement bonus Fa, Hd fox’s cunning 4,000 gp Intelligence, +2 to +4 enhancement bonus Fa, Hd fox’s cunning 12,000 gp Intelligence, +4 to +6 enhancement bonus Fa, Hd fox’s cunning 20,000 gp Strength, +2 enhancement bonus A, Ha, W bull’s strength 4,000 gp Strength, +2 to +4 enhancement bonus A, Ha, W bull’s strength 12,000 gp Strength, +4 to +6 enhancement bonus A, Ha, W bull’s strength 20,000 gp Wisdom, +2 enhancement bonus Hd, Th owl’s wisdom 4,000 gp Wisdom, +2 to +4 enhancement bonus Hd, Th owl’s wisdom 12,000 gp Wisdom, +4 to +6 enhancement bonus Hd, Th owl’s wisdom 20,000 gp Resistance to energy, 5 B, R, S, To resist energy 4,000 gp Resistance to energy, 5 to 10 B, R, S, To resist energy 8,000 gp Resistance to energy, 10 to 20 B, R, S, To resist energy 16,000 gp Resistance to energy, 20 to 30 B, R, S, To resist energy 16,000 gp Saving throws, +1 resistance bonus S, To resistance, CL 3 × bonus 1,000 gp Saving throws, +1 to +2 resistance bonus S, To resistance, CL 3 × bonus 3,000 gp Saving throws, +2 to +3 resistance bonus S, To resistance, CL 3 × bonus 5,000 gp 7,000 gp Saving throws, +3 to +4 resistance bonus S, To resistance, CL 3 × bonus Saving throws, +4 to +5 resistance bonus S, To resistance, CL 3 × bonus 9,000 gp * A = Arms; B = Body; Fa = Face; Ft = Feet; Ha = Hands; Hd = Head; R = Ring; S = Shoulders; Th = Throat; To = Torso; W = Waist. 1 The character performing the crafting must also have the item creation feat appropriate for the item to which the effect is added. 2 Cannot be added to any item that already provides a (nonmagical) armor or shield bonus to AC.  Table 6–11: Adding/Improving Common Item Effects presents a list of common item effects, from ability score enhancement bonuses to energy resistance, and the price to add that effect to an item. The table also indicates the appropriate body slot (or slots) for each effect. For example, you can add an enhancement bonus to Charisma only to an item that occupies the head or shoulders body slot (such as a headband or cloak). A DM can choose to deviate from this guideline, but should avoid nonsensical combinations (such as gloves that provide a bonus to Wisdom). Adding one of these effects to an existing item works much like creating an item from scratch. The crafting character must meet the given prerequisites, must expend gold equal to one-half  the price and XP equal to 1/25 the price, and must spend 1 day per 1,000 gp of the price. Example: Lidda has a pair of boots of striding and springing, and she wants to add a Dexterity bonus (rather than buying gloves of Dexterity). Her friend Mialee isn’t around, so Lidda must track down a stranger to do the work. She pays the wizard 4,000 gp, and four days later her boots now also grant her a +2 enhancement bonus to Dexterity. When Lidda later decides to improve the bonus to +4, she manages to talk Mialee (who has the Craft Wondrous Item feat and knows the cat’s grace spell) into performing the work. After spending eight 8-hour days of work and expending 6,000 gp of components (likely supplied by Lidda) and 480 XP, Mialee succeeds in increasing the +2 enhancement bonus to Dexterity to +4.  234  620_10762_Chp6.indd 234  12/21/06 5:53:46 AM  Appendix 1: Magic Items by Price  APPENDIX 1  versions, properties with improved and greater versions, and similar items are listed according to the second word in the name. Effect: A summary of the item’s effect or benefit can be found here; refer to the item’s description for specifics. Market Price: The typical purchase price for this item. Note that it might not always be possible to buy the item at this price— check with your DM. The prices for armor, shields, and weapons that have only an enhancement bonus are represented by a gp amount followed by a plus sign. In these cases, the plus sign stands for “in addition to the cost of the armor, shield, or weapon itself.” The given gp amount includes the cost of the masterwork quality. Synergy properties, relics, and item set pieces are indicated with superscripts: Synergy with S, relics with R, and set pieces with SP.  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  This appendix contains all the magic items from Magic Item Compendium and the Dungeon Master’s Guide arranged by body slot and price. These tables serve as shopping lists—a way to find magic items that fall within your budget. The tables are in the same general order as the body of this book, but clothing is separated by body slot. Item set pieces are integrated into the tables that correspond to their body slots. Each entry contains the following information: Page: The page number where the item can be found is indicated here, along with a letter code associated with the book it is in. Most entries begin either with “M” to indicate Magic Item Compendium or “D” for Dungeon Master’s Guide. Items that use individual spells (such as wands, scrolls, and potions) use “P” to reference spell descriptions in the Player’s Handbook. Item Name: Items that have the same price are presented alphabetically within the price range. Items with greater and lesser  ITEM LISTS Armor Properties Page M6 M15 M9 M10 M9 M9 D219 M9 M13 M6 M6 M6 M9 M10 M10 M10 M10 M11 D219 M11 M13 M13 M14 M15 M15 M7 D219 D219 D219 M6 M9 M12 M15 M13 M11 M12 M14 M6 M12 M15  Item Name Agility Stamina Blueshine Easy travel Called Commander Glamered Daylight Mindarmor Acidic Anchoring Anchoring, greaterS Blurring Death ward Displacement Dragondodger Ectoplasmic feedback Energy defenseS Fortification, light Ghost ward Mobility Nimbleness Soulbound Styptic Twilight Balance Shadow Silent moves Slick Agility, improvedS Buoyant Landing Stamina, improvedS Quickness Gilled Linked Speed Agility, greaterS Healing Stamina, greaterS  Effect +1 on Reflex saves +1 on Fortitude saves Immune to acid damage and rust, +2 on Hide, metal armor only Carry medium load as light load, walk 10 hours a day with no Con check Call armor to you on command +2 on Diplomacy, allies within 30 ft. gain +1 on Will saves and –5 on Hide Can change to look like normal clothing, on command Daylight for 30 minutes/day 3/day gain +5 on Will saves against mind-affecting spells and abilities Deals 2d4 points of acid damage/round on contact +5 bonus on checks to resist being moved +10 bonus on checks to resist being moved 3/day blur for 5 rounds 1/day ignore death effect or negative energy effect 1/day displacement for 5 rounds Evasion ability against breath weapons, light armor only 1d6 damage to incorporeal creatures 3/day 1d6+10 energy damage to attacker 25% chance to negate criticals, sneak attacks Armor’s enhancement bonus applies against touch attacks Gain benefit of Mobility feat, light armor only Maximum Dex bonus 1 higher, armor check penalty 2 less Stores up to 2 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses Stabilized if dying, resistance to blood-draining attacks Arcane spell failure chance reduced by 10% +5 competence bonus on Balance +5 on Hide +5 on Move Silently +5 on Escape Artist +3 on Reflex saves +2 on Swim, no armor check penalty on Swim checks Ignore first 60 ft. of fall damage, always land on feet +3 on Fortitude saves +5 ft. to land speed Water-breathing wearer breathes and speaks freely in air 3/day telepathic bond with other linked item wearers for 1 hour 3/day haste for 1 round +5 on Reflex saves 1/day healed of 2d8+5 damage +5 on Fortitude saves  Market Price +500 gp +500 gp +1,500 gp +1,500 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +2,700 gp +3,000 gp +3,000 gp +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +3,750 gp +3,750 gp +3,750 gp +3,750 gp +4,000 gp +4,000 gp +4,000 gp +4,000 gp +5,000 gp +6,000 gp +6,000 gp +6,000 gp +8,000 gp +8,000 gp +8,000 gp  235  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 235  12/21/06 6:02:30 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Armor Properties (cont.) Page M7 M7 M9 M11 M12 M14 M14 M14 D219 M15 M12 M7 M10 M7 M9 M11 D219 D219 D219 D219 D219 D219 M14 D219 M15 D219 D217 D218 D218 D218 D219 M7 M6 M12 M13 D219 M13 D219 D219 D219 D219 M11 D219 M12 D217 D218 D218 D219 D219 D218 D219 D218 D218 D218 D219 D219  Item Name Axeblock Beastskin Blurring, greaterS Energy immunity Hammerblock Retaliation Soulbound, greaterS Spearblock Spell resistance (13) Woodwalk Magic-eating Balance, improvedS Deepdweller Bane blind Blinking Fearsome Shadow, improved Silent moves, improved Slick, improved Fortification, moderate Ghost touch Invulnerability Roaring Spell resistance (15) Vanishing Wild Acid resistance Cold resistance Electricity resistance Fire resistance Sonic resistance Balance, greaterS Aporter Healing, greaterS Radiant Spell resistance (17) Menacing Shadow, greater Silent moves, greater Slick, greater Fortification, heavy Freedom Spell resistance (19) Masking Acid resistance, improved Cold resistance, improved Electricity resistance, improved Fire resistance, improved Sonic resistance, improved Etherealness Undead controlling Acid resistance, greater Cold resistance, greater Electricity resistance, greater Fire resistance, greater Sonic resistance, greater  Effect Damage reduction 5/bludgeoning or piercing Armor effective in wild shape As blur spell for 10 minutes, at will 1/day gain immunity to energy damage of choice for 1 minute Damage reduction 5/piercing or slashing Deals damage when you are attacked Stores up to 4 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses Damage reduction 5/bludgeoning or slashing Spell resistance 13 3/day tree stride for 1 round Heal 1 point per spell level if you save against a spell +10 competence bonus on Balance Breathe and function in deep water, see twice as far underwater Imperceptible to specified creature type 1/day blink 3/day panics creatures within 20 ft. for 1 round +10 on Hide +10 on Move Silently +10 on Escape Artist 75% chance to negate critical hits, sneak attacks Effective against, can be used by incorporeal creatures DR 5/magic Reflects nonmagic projectiles, +4 on initiative Spell resistance 15 2/day completely undetectable for up to 3 minutes Bonuses apply while in wild shape Absorbs 10 points of acid damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of cold damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of electricity damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of fire damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of sonic damage per attack +15 competence bonus on Balance Transports you up to 800 ft. as dimension door 2/day healed of 3d8+15 damage Resistance 10 against all energy attacks; radiates light Spell resistance 17 3/day panics one creature within 30 ft. for 5 rounds +15 on Hide +15 on Move Silently +15 on Escape Artist Always negates critical hits, sneak attacks Continual freedom of movement Spell resistance 19 Continual nondetection Absorbs 20 points of acid damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of cold damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of electricity damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of fire damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of sonic damage per attack 1/day can become ethereal Control up to 26 HD of undead per day Absorbs 30 points of acid damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of cold damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of electricity damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of fire damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of sonic damage per attack  Market Price +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +9,000 gp +10,000 gp +11,250 gp +12,000 gp +15,000 gp +15,000 gp +15,000 gp +15,000 gp +15,000 gp +15,000 gp +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,750 gp +20,000 gp +24,000 gp +4 bonus +4 bonus +30,000 gp +33,750 gp +33,750 gp +33,750 gp +5 bonus +5 bonus +5 bonus +40,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +49,000 gp +49,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp  Effect Call shield to you on command +2 on Diplomacy, allies within 30 ft. gain +1 on Will saves and –5 on Hide 2/day gain 5 temporary hit points for 5 minutes Daylight for 30 minutes/day 3/day gain +3 on Will saves against mind-affecting spells and abilities Deals 2d4 points of acid damage/round on contact  Market Price +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +3,000 gp +3,000 gp +1 bonus  Shield Properties Page M9 M9 M12 M9 M13 M6  Item Name Called Commander Heartening Daylight Mindarmor Acidic  236  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 236  12/21/06 6:02:32 AM  Shield Properties (cont). Effect +5 on checks to resist being moved +10 on checks to resist being moved Attracts, gives +1 bonus against projectiles and thrown weapons Deals bashing damage as a weapon of two size categories larger 2/day blinds all but you 1/day ignore death effect or negative energy effect 3/day 1d6+10 energy damage to attacker 25% chance to negate critical hits, sneak attacks Shield’s enhancement bonus applies against touch attacks Shield can be thrown as a weapon, returns to you; not tower shield Stores up to 2 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses Changes size on command 3/day telepathic bond with other linked item wearers for 1 hour 1/day draw 3 power points from shield 3/day haste for 1 round Floats within 2 ft. of you on command Protects you as Deflect Arrows feat Damage reduction 5/bludgeoning and piercing 1/day wall of ectoplasm 1/day gain immunity to energy damage of choice for 1 minute Damage reduction 5/piercing and slashing Stores up to 4 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses Damage reduction 5/bludgeoning and slashing Spell resistance 13 Enemies within 30 ft. can’t approach 3/day panics creatures within 20 ft. Effective against, can be used by incorporeal creatures 75% chance to negate critical hits, sneak attacks Spell resistance 15 2/day completely undetectable for up to 3 minutes Bonuses apply while in wild shape Absorbs 10 points of acid damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of cold damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of electricity damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of fire damage per attack Absorbs 10 points of sonic damage per attack Transports you up to 800 ft. as dimension door Spell resistance 17 Always negates critical hits, sneak attacks 1/day reflect a spell as spell turning Spell resistance 19 1/day ignore all attacks, spells, and powers for 1 round Absorbs 20 points of acid damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of cold damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of electricity damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of fire damage per attack Absorbs 20 points of sonic damage per attack Control up to 26 HD of undead per day Absorbs 30 points of acid damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of cold damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of electricity damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of fire damage per attack Absorbs 30 points of sonic damage per attack  Market Price +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +6,000 gp +6,000 gp +6,000 gp +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +2 bonus +13,000 gp +15,000 gp +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +18,000 gp +20,000 gp +4 bonus +5 bonus +5 bonus +5 bonus +5 bonus +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +42,000 gp +49,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp +66,000 gp  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Anchoring Anchoring, greaterS Arrow catching Bashing Blinding Death ward Energy defenseS Fortification, light Ghost ward Ranged Soulbound Variable Linked Manifester Speed Animated Arrow deflection Axeblock Ectoplasmic wall Energy immunity Hammerblock Soulbound, greaterS Spearblock Spell resistance (13) Averter Fearsome Ghost touch Fortification, moderate Spell resistance (15) Vanishing Wild Acid resistance Cold resistance Electricity resistance Fire resistance Sonic resistance Aporter Spell resistance (17) Fortification, heavy Reflecting Spell resistance (19) Time buttress Acid resistance, improved Cold resistance, improved Electricity resistance, improved Fire resistance, improved Sonic resistance, improved Undead controlling Acid resistance, greater Cold resistance, greater Electricity resistance, greater Fire resistance, greater Sonic resistance, greater  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M6 M6 D218 D218 D218 M10 M11 D219 M11 M13 M14 M15 M12 M12 M14 D218 D218 M7 M10 M11 M12 M14 M14 D219 M7 M11 D219 D219 D219 M15 D219 D217 D218 D218 D218 D219 M6 D219 D219 D219 D219 M15 D217 D218 D218 D219 D219 D219 D218 D218 D218 D219 D219  Specific Armor and Shields Page P126 D221 D221 D221 D220 D216 M21 D221 D220  Item Name Armor/shield, masterwork Darkwood buckler Darkwood shield Mithral heavy shield Mithral shirt +1 armor/shield Shield of mercy Caster’s shield Dragonhide plate  Effect –1 to armor check penalty Light wooden shield has no armor check penalty Heavy wooden shield has no armor check penalty Mithral heavy shield has 5% arcane spell failure and no armor check penalty Mithral chain shirt is lightweight +1 enhancement bonus to AC, –1 to armor check penalty +1 heavy steel shield, expend smite attempts to heal damage +1 light wooden shield, can have a spell scribed on it (as a scroll) Identical to masterwork full plate, but can be worn by druids  Market Price (gp) 150+ 215 257 1,020 1,100 1,150+ 2,170 3,153 3,300  237  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 237  12/21/06 6:02:34 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Specific Armor and Shields (cont.) Page M20 D220 D216 M16 M22 D220 M21 D221 M196 M24 M20 M20 D216 M23 D221 M18 M18 D219 M20 M19 M19 M192 M17 M23 M16 D216 M24 D220 M16 M22 D221 M17 D220 M23 M18 D220 M20 D220 D220 D220 M17 D221 D220  Item Name Mithralmist shirt Elven chain +2 armor/shield Barricade buckler Shield of the severed handR Rhino hide Shield of the resolute R Spined shield Shield of vigorSP Wrapped tower Millennial chainmailR Owlfeather armor +3 armor/shield Wight hide shield Lion’s shield Foxhide armor Ghoul shell armor Adamantine breastplate Serpent armor Hawkfeather armor Kyton armor Breastplate of terrorSP Electric eel hide Wight armor Bearskin armor +4 armor/shield Zombie hide armor Dwarven plate Armor of the fallen leavesR Tigerskin armor Winged shield Dragonrider armor Banded mail of luck Vampire hide armor Exoskeleton armor Celestial armor Overhead shield Plate armor of the deep Breastplate of command Mithral full plate of speed Earthplate armor Absorbing shield Demon armor  Effect Market Price (gp) +1 mithral shirt, 7/day concealment against attack for 1 minute 3,460 Mithral chainmail is considered light armor and has lower penalties 4,150 Armor or shield with a bonus equivalent to +2 4,150+ +1 buckler, 3/day turns into 5 ft. by 5 ft. vertical wall of force for 1 minute 4,165 Gruumsh: +2 heavy wooden shield plus relic powers 4,657 +2 hide, deals extra 2d6 damage on successful charge attacks 5,165 Moradin: +1 light fortification heavy mithral shield plus relic powers 5,520 +1 heavy steel shield, 3/day fire a spine 5,580 +1 heavy steel shield, 1/day fast healing 5 for 3 rounds ( five virtues) 6,170 +1 tower shield, 1/day paralyze enemy while using shield to gain total cover 6,180 Corellon Larethian: +1 mithral chainmail plus relic powers 8,150 +1 leather, various owl-themed bonuses and effects 8,160 Armor or shield with a bonus equivalent to +3 9,150+ +1 light steel shield, shield bash with negative level effect 9,159 +2 heavy steel shield, 3/day lion’s head can attack 9,170 +1 leather, various fox-themed bonuses and effects 10,160 +1 leather, 3/day ghoul touch 10,160 Gives DR 2/— 10,200 +1 leather, +1 on Reflex saving throws, gain benefit of Combat Reflexes feat 12,160 +1 studded leather, various hawk-themed bonuses and effects 12,175 +1 mithral shirt, chains on armor can be activated as weapons 13,100 +1 adamantine breastplate, 1/day frighten foe (armor of the watching master) 13,200 +1 buoyant slick hide, 3/day various electricity damage effects for 5 rounds 14,165 +1 shadow studded leather, 3/day hide from undead, 60 ft. darkvision 14,175 +1 breastplate, various bear-themed bonuses and effects 14,350 Armor or shield with a bonus equivalent to +4 16,150+ +1 hide, damage reduction 5/slashing 16,165 Adamantine full plate gives DR 3/— 16,500 Obad-Hai: +1 wild breastplate plus relic powers 17,350 +1 mithral shirt, various tiger-themed bonuses and effects 17,100 +3 heavy wooden shield, 1/day can fly at speed of 60 ft., carrying you 17,257 +1 dragonhide full plate, various dragon-themed bonuses and effects 18,300 +3 banded mail, 1/week can require that an attack roll against you be rerolled 18,900 +1 studded leather, damage reduction 5/silver or magic 36,175 +1 breastplate, DR 5/bludgeoning 21,350 +3 chainmail, lighter than normal, 1/day fly 22,400 +1 heavy steel shield, 1/day 20-ft.-radius horizontal wall of force for 10 rounds 24,170 +1 full plate, no Swim penalty, breathe underwater, speak with water-breathing creatures 24,650 +2 breastplate, +2 on Cha checks, +2 bonus to Leadership score 25,400 +1 mithral full plate, 10 rounds/day haste effect 26,500 +1 full plate, 1/day stoneskin, tremorsense 5 ft., both up to 90 minutes 41,650 +1 heavy steel shield, once per two days can disintegrate an object it touches 50,170 +4 full plate, claw attacks with contagion effect 52,260  Armor and Shield Crystals  238  Page M25 M24 M25 M26 M26 M24 M24 M25 M25 M25 M25 M26 M26 M26 M26 M25 M25 M26 M24 M24  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 238  Item Name Crystal of lifekeeping, least Crystal of adamant armor, least Crystal of aquatic action, least Crystal of stamina, least Crystal of screening, least Clasp of energy protection, least Crystal of adaptation, least Crystal of arrow deflection, least Crystal of bent sight Crystal of glancing blows, least Crystal of mind cloaking, least Iron ward diamond, least Restful crystal Rubicund frenzy, least Crystal of stamina, lesser Crystal of aquatic action, lesser Crystal of lifekeeping, lesser Crystal of screening, lesser Crystal of adamant armor, lesser Clasp of energy protection, lesser  Effect Market Price (gp) +1 on saves against energy drain attacks, inflict wounds, and death effects 200 +2 to hardness of armor or shield 300 No armor check penalty on Swim 250 +1 on saves against disease and poison 300 –2 on touch attacks made against you by incorporeal creatures 400 Resistance 5 to specific energy type, prevents up to 25 damage per day 500 Protected as endure elements 500 +2 to AC against ranged attacks 500 Avert eyes from creature with gaze attack without suffering attack miss chance 500 +2 on grapple checks to prevent a grapple from being initiated 500 +1 on saves against mind-affecting effects 500 DR 1/—, prevents up to 10 damage per day 500 Sleep in armor without becoming fatigued 500 +1 on weapon damage rolls and saves against fear when at half or fewer hp 500 +3 on saves against disease and poison 900 No armor check penalty on Swim; swim speed equal to half land speed 1,000 +3 on saves against energy drain attacks, inflict spells, and death effects 1,000 –5 on touch attacks made against you by incorporeal creatures 1,000 +5 to hardness of armor or shield 1,400 Resistance 10 to specific energy type, prevents up to 50 damage per day 1,500  12/21/06 6:02:36 AM  Armor and Shield Crystals (cont.)  M25 M25 M26 M24 M195 M25 M25 M25 M25  Crystal of aquatic action, greater Crystal of glancing blows, lesser Crystal of screening, greater Crystal of adamant armor, greater Crystal of alacritySP Crystal of mind cloaking, lesser Crystal of arrow deflection, greater Crystal of glancing blows, greater Crystal of lifekeeping, greater  M26 M26 M25  Rubicund frenzy, greater Iron ward diamond, greater Crystal of mind cloaking, greater  Effect Market Price (gp) Protected as endure elements; immune to alignment traits of planes 1,500 DR 3/—, prevents up to 30 damage per day 2,000 +3 on weapon damage rolls and saves against fear when at half or fewer hp 2,000 +5 to AC against ranged attacks 2,500 +5 on saves against disease and poison; reroll 1 such failed save 2,700 Resistance 15 to specific energy type, prevents up to 75 damage per day 3,000 Protected as endure elements; immune to alignment and positive/negative 3,000 traits of planes No armor check penalty on Swim; swim speed equal to half land speed; 3,000 breathe and move freely underwater +5 on grapple checks to prevent a grapple from being initiated 3,000 –10 on touch attacks made against you by incorporeal creatures 3,000 +10 to hardness of armor or shield 3,400 +5 ft. morale bonus to speed ( five virtues) 3,500 +3 on saves against mind-affecting spells and abilities 4,000 +5 to AC against ranged attacks; deflect 1 ranged attack/round 5,000 +10 on grapple checks to prevent a grapple from being initiated 5,000 +5 on saves against energy drain attacks, inflict spells, and death effects; 5,000 reroll 1 such failed save +5 on weapon damage rolls and saves against fear when at half or fewer hp 6,000 DR 5/—, prevents up to 50 damage per day 8,000 +5 on saves against mind-affecting effects; reroll 1 such failed save 10,000  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Crystal of adaptation, lesser Iron ward diamond, lesser Rubicund frenzy, lesser Crystal of arrow deflection, lesser Crystal of stamina, greater Clasp of energy protection, greater Crystal of adaptation, greater  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M24 M26 M26 M25 M26 M24 M24  Melee Weapon Properties Page M36 M28 M31  Item Name Illuminating Aquatic Changeling  M34 M36 M43 M43 M43 M28 D224 M29 M29 M29 M29 M29 M30 M30 M31 M31 M31 M32 D224 M32  Everbright Hideaway Shadowstrike Sizing Slow burst Acidic burst S Bane Berserker Binding Blessed Bloodfeeding Bloodstone Brash Brutal surge Chargebreaker Charging Corrosive Deadly precision Defending Defensive surge  M32 M32 M32 M33 M33 M33 M33 M33 M34 M34 M35 D224 D224 M35 D224 M35  Dessicating Dessicating burst S Dislocator Dislocator, great S Dispelling Dispelling, greaterS Divine wrath Dragondoom Eager Energy surgeS FiercebaneS Flaming Frost Ghost strike S Ghost touch Harmonizing  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 239  Effect Bright illumination to 20 ft., shadowy illumination to 40 ft. Freedom of movement underwater Change length and appearance of spear at will; spears, shortspears, and longspears only 2/day blinding effect, weapon is immune to acid damage and rusting Collapses to two size categories smaller, easy to conceal 1/day add 5 ft. to reach and deny target Dex bonus to AC Changes size category on command On critical hit, target slowed for 3 rounds As corrosive, extra acid damage on critical hit +2 bonus, +2d6 damage against one type of creature +1d8 damage while raging; two-handed weapons only 2/day dimensional anchor on target for 10 minutes Gains some bless weapon traits Stores blood points that can be released for extra damage Stores and empowers one vampiric touch spell Rage lasts for 3 additional rounds, immune to fear effects 1 + Con bonus times per day, make powerful bull rush attack Charging targets knocked prone +2d6 damage on charge attacks while mounted +1d6 acid damage +1d6 damage on sneak attack or sudden strike Add enhancement bonus to AC 1 + Int bonus times per day, +2 to AC for one turn if using Combat Expertise or fighting defensively +1d4 damage, +1d8 damage to plants and water elementals As desiccating, extra desiccating damage on critical hit 3/day struck target teleported up to 10 ft. 3/day struck target teleported up to 30 ft. 3/day struck target subject to dispel magic 3/day struck target subject to greater dispel magic Expend turn undead use to imbue weapon with divine power 3/day deliver smite attack against creature of dragon type Various speed-themed bonuses As prerequisite property, 1 + Con bonus times/day, +3d6 energy damage As bane, extra benefits against bane type or subtype +1d6 fire damage +1d6 cold damage As ghost touch, can deal sneak attacks and critical hits to undead Deals damage normally to/can be used by incorporeal creatures Various bonuses to bardic music  Market Price +500 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +5,000 gp +5,000 gp +5,000 gp +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus  239  12/21/06 6:02:39 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Melee Weapon Properties (cont.) Page M36 M36 M36 M36 M37 M37 M38 D225 D225 M38 M38 M38 M38 D225 D225 M39 M39 M39 M39 M40 M40 M40 M41 M41 M42 M42 M42 M42 M42 M42 M43 M43 D225 M43 M44 M44 D225 M44 M44 M44 M44 M44 M44 D226 D225 M45 M45 D225 M46 M46 M46 M45 M38 D223 M28 M28 D223 M28 M29 M29 M31 M31 M32 D224 M33  Item Name Heavenly burst Holy surgeS Hunting Illusion bane Impact Impaling Incorporeal bindingS Keen Ki focus Knockback Lucky Magebane Maiming Merciful Mighty cleaving Mighty smiting Mindfeeder Morphing Paralyzing Power storing Profane Profane burst S Psychokinetic Psychokinetic burst S Resounding Revealing Sacred Sacred burst S Screaming Screaming burst S Shattermantle Shielding Shock Soulbound SoulbreakerS SouldrinkingS Spell storing Spellstrike StunningS Stunning surge Stygian Sundering Sweeping Throwing Thundering Unholy surge S Venomous Vicious Warning Weakening Whirling Vanishing Manifester Anarchic Aquan Auran Axiomatic Banishing Blindsighted Blurstrike Collision Consumptive Disarming Disruption Domineering  Effect Market Price On critical hit, +3d6 damage and blinding effect to evil creatures +1 bonus As holy, 1 + Cha bonus times per day, +3d6 damage to evil target +1 bonus +4 on weapon damage rolls against favored enemies +1 bonus 1/day destroy illusions, ignore miss chance from illusion effects +1 bonus Double threat range, bludgeoning weapons only +1 bonus 3/day treat next attack before end of turn as touch attack, piercing weapons only +1 bonus As ghost touch, incorporeal target loses some incorporeal traits for 1 round +1 bonus Double threat range, piercing or slashing weapons only +1 bonus Use ki attacks as if unarmed +1 bonus 3/day pushes back target 5 ft. +1 bonus 1/day reroll one failed attack roll +1 bonus Extra benefits against arcane spellcasters, invokers +1 bonus On critical hit, deal extra damage based on critical multiplier +1 bonus +1d6 damage, all damage is nonlethal on command +1 bonus One additional cleave attempt per round if you have Cleave feat +1 bonus +2 on smite’s attack roll and damage roll, one extra smite per day +1 bonus Gain 1 temporary power point per 5 points of critical hit damage dealt +1 bonus Can become any melee or thrown weapon of same size and type +1 bonus 1/day target paralyzed for up to 10 rounds +1 bonus Stores single targeted power of up to 5 power points +1 bonus +1d6 damage to living creatures, various evil-themed abilities +1 bonus As profane, on critical hit, extra negative energy and Con damage +1 bonus +1d4 force damage +1 bonus As psychokinetic, extra force damage on critical hit +1 bonus On successful attack, allies gain +1 morale bonus on attacks and against fear for 1 round +1 bonus Struck target subject to faerie fire +1 bonus +1d6 damage to undead or +2d6 to evil outsider, good-aligned for overcoming DR +1 bonus As sacred, extra positive energy and Cha damage on critical hit +1 bonus +1d4 sonic damage +1 bonus As screaming, extra sonic damage on critical hit +1 bonus Struck target’s spell resistance reduced by 2 for 1 round +1 bonus Transforms into heavy steel shield on command, light weapons only +1 bonus +1d6 electricity damage +1 bonus Stores up to 2 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses +1 bonus As enervating, negative levels from enervating property might be permanent +1 bonus As enervating, on critical hit gain 5 temporary hp, +2 on melee damage rolls +1 bonus Store single targeted spell of up to 3rd level +1 bonus Transfer enhancement bonus to saves against spells or spell-like abilities +1 bonus As screaming, struck target stunned for 1 round on critical hit +1 bonus +1 Cha bonus times per day, target stunned for 1 round +1 bonus 3/day next attack bestows negative level on target for 10 minutes +1 bonus Attack as Improved Sunder, +1d6 damage on sunder attacks +1 bonus +2 on Strength checks to trip an opponent with the weapon +1 bonus Range increment of 10 ft., can be thrown +1 bonus Deals sonic damage, deafens on critical hit +1 bonus As unholy, 1 + Cha bonus times per day, +3d6 damage to good target +1 bonus 3/day coat weapon in poison dealing 1d4 initial and secondary Str damage +1 bonus +2d6 damage, 1d6 damage to you on every attack +1 bonus +5 on initiative +1 bonus On critical hit, target takes –4 to its Strength +1 bonus 3/day strike all adjacent opponents as Whirlwind Attack +1 bonus 1/day after attack, transport self and gear up to 60 ft. as dimension door +8,000 gp 1/day draw 5 power points from weapon when manifesting power +12,000 gp +2d6 damage against lawful creatures +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with fire subtype +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with earth subtype +2 bonus +2d6 damage against chaotic creatures +2 bonus 3/day banish a struck creature back to its home plane +2 bonus 3/day gain blindsight out to 30 ft. for 1 minute +2 bonus 10/day first attack made in round treats target as flat-footed +2 bonus +5 damage on each successful attack +2 bonus +1d8 damage against living creatures +2 bonus +2 on disarm attempts, you cannot be disarmed +2 bonus Destroy undead (bludgeoning weapons only) +2 bonus Struck target shaken for 1 minute +2 bonus  240  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 240  12/21/06 6:02:41 AM  Melee Weapon Properties (cont.) Effect Market Price On critical hit, target shaken for 5 rounds +2 bonus +1d6 damage of energy type of choice +2 bonus On critical hit, bestow one negative level on living target for 1 hour +2 bonus +1d6 fire damage, extra fire damage on critical hit +2 bonus Lodges in creature and deals normal damage for 5 rounds; piercing or slashing weapons only +2 bonus +2d6 damage against evil creatures +2 bonus +1d6 cold damage, extra cold damage on critical hit +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with water subtype +2 bonus As illusion bane, 1/day steal illusions +2 bonus Impedes struck target’s ability to create spell effects +2 bonus Change composition to adamantine, silver, cold iron, or steel +2 bonus Struck psionic target loses power points, nonpsionic target takes Wis damage +2 bonus On critical hit, target paralyzed for 1 round +2 bonus +1 to AC, +1 on saves +2 bonus Extra benefits against psionic creatures +2 bonus Gains enhancement bonus based on power point reserve +2 bonus +1d6 electricity damage, extra electricity damage on critical hit +2 bonus Stores up to 4 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with air subtype +2 bonus Transforms to overcome target’s damage reduction +2 bonus +2d6 damage against good creatures +2 bonus +1d6 damage to living creatures, healed of amount equal to extra damage +2 bonus +1 point Con damage +2 bonus On critical hit, target subject to prismatic spray +30,000 gp Gain temporary hp equal to half damage dealt by critical hits +3 bonus On critical hit, bestows curse for 1 minute +3 bonus As the ghost touch property, and continuous see invisibility +3 bonus Target loses 2 hp/round for 5 rounds +3 bonus Deal ability drain and bestow negative levels as with natural weapons +3 bonus Extra attack with full attack +3 bonus Sheds light, ignores armor bonuses to AC and nonliving matter +4 bonus Fights on its own for 4 rounds, on command +4 bonus Sever foe’s head on critical hit; slashing weapons only +5 bonus  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Doom burst Energy aura Enervating Flaming burst Fleshgrinding Holy Icy burst Ignan Illusion theft S Impedance Metalline Mindcrusher Paralytic burst Parrying Psibane Psychic Shocking burst Soulbound, greaterS Terran Transmuting Unholy Vampiric Wounding Prismatic burst Bodyfeeder Cursespewing Ethereal reaver Implacable Necrotic focus Speed Brilliant energy Dancing Vorpal  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M33 M34 M34 D224 M35 D225 D225 M36 M37 M37 M38 M39 M39 M40 M41 M41 D225 M43 M45 M45 D225 M45 D225 M40 M30 M31 M34 M37 M39 D225 D224 D224 D225  Ranged Weapon Properties Page M36 M28 M34 M36 M43 M43 M43 M28 M28 D224 M29 M29 M31 M32 M32 M32 M32 M33 M33 M33 D224 M33 M33  Item Name Illuminating Aquatic Everbright Hideaway Shadowstrike Sizing Slow burst Acidic burst S Arcane might Bane Binding Blessed Corrosive Deadly precision Dessicating Dessicating burst S Dislocator Dislocator, great S Dispelling Dispelling, greaterS Distance Divine wrath Dragonhunter  M35 D224 D224 M36 M36 M36  FiercebaneS Flaming Frost Heavenly burst Hunting Illusion bane  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 241  Effect Bright illumination to 20 ft., shadowy illumination to 40 ft. Freedom of movement underwater 2/day blinding effect, weapon is immune to acid damage and rusting Collapses to two size categories smaller, easy to conceal 1/day add 5 ft. to reach and deny target Dex bonus to AC Changes size category on command On critical hit, target slowed for 3 rounds As corrosive, extra acid damage on critical hit Sacrifice spell use for extra damage on next bow attack; bows only +2 bonus, +2d6 damage against one type of creature 2/day dimensional anchor on target for 10 minutes Gains some bless weapon traits +1d6 acid damage +1d6 damage on sneak attack or sudden strike +1d4 damage, +1d8 damage to plants and water elementals As desiccating, extra desiccating damage on critical hit 3/day struck target teleported up to 10 ft. 3/day struck target teleported up to 30 ft. 3/day struck target subject to dispel magic 3/day struck target subject to greater dispel magic Double range increment Expend turn undead use to imbue weapon with divine power Dragon target takes 1 Str damage, critical hit multiplier increases against dragons; projectile weapons only As bane, extra benefits against bane type or subtype +1d6 fire damage +1d6 cold damage On critical hit, +3d6 damage and blinding effect to evil creatures +4 on weapon damage rolls against favored enemies 1/day destroy illusions, ignore miss chance from illusion effects  Market Price +500 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +2,000 gp +5,000 gp +5,000 gp +5,000 gp +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus +1 bonus  241  12/21/06 6:02:43 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Ranged Weapon Properties (cont.) Page M37 M38 M38 M38 M38 D225 M39 M39 M40 M40 M40 M40 M41 M41 M41 D225 M42 M42 M42 M42 M42 D225 M43 D225 M43 M44 M44 M44 M44 M44 D225 M45 M46 M46 M38 D223 M28 M28 D223 M28 M29 M31 M31 M32 M33 M33 M34 M34 D224 M35 D225 D225 M36 M37 M37 M38 M39 M39 M40 M41 M41 D225 M43 M45 M45  Item Name Impact Knockback Lucky Magebane Maiming Merciful Mindfeeder Morphing Power storing Precise Profane Profane burst S Psychokinetic Psychokinetic burst S Quick loading Returning Revealing Sacred Sacred burst S Screaming Screaming burst S Seeking Shattermantle Shock Soulbound SoulbreakerS Spellstrike StunningS Stunning surge Stygian Thundering Venomous Warning Weakening Manifester Anarchic Aquan Auran Axiomatic Banishing Blindsighted Collision Consumptive Disarming Domineering Doom burst Energy aura Enervating Flaming burst Force Holy Icy burst Ignan Illusion theft S Impedance Metalline Mindcrusher Paralytic burst Parrying Psibane Psychic Shocking burst Soulbound, greaterS Terran Transmuting  Effect Market Price Double threat range; bludgeoning weapons only +1 bonus 3/day pushes back target 5 ft. +1 bonus 1/day reroll one failed attack roll +1 bonus Extra benefits against arcane spellcasters, invokers +1 bonus On critical hit, deal extra damage based on critical multiplier +1 bonus +1d6 damage, all damage is nonlethal on command +1 bonus Gain 1 temporary power point per 5 points of critical hit damage dealt +1 bonus Can become any melee or thrown weapon of same size and type; thrown weapons only +1 bonus Stores single targeted power of up to 5 power points +1 bonus Shoot or throw into melee without –4 penalty +1 bonus +1d6 damage to living creatures, various evil-themed abilities +1 bonus As profane, on critical hit, extra negative energy and Con damage +1 bonus +1d4 force damage +1 bonus As psychokinetic, extra force damage on critical hit +1 bonus Reload quickly, store 100 bolts in extradimensional space; crossbows only +1 bonus Returns to thrower +1 bonus Struck target subject to faerie fire +1 bonus +1d6 damage to undead or +2d6 to evil outsider, good-aligned for overcoming DR +1 bonus As sacred, extra positive energy and Cha damage on critical hit +1 bonus +1d4 sonic damage +1 bonus As screaming, extra sonic damage on critical hit +1 bonus Negate any miss chances +1 bonus Struck target’s spell resistance reduced by 2 for 1 round +1 bonus +1d6 electricity damage +1 bonus Stores up to 2 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses +1 bonus As enervating, negative levels from enervating property might be permanent +1 bonus Transfer enhancement bonus to saves against spells or spell-like abilities +1 bonus As screaming, struck target stunned for 1 round on critical hit +1 bonus +1 Cha bonus times per day, target stunned for 1 round +1 bonus 3/day next attack bestows negative level on target for 10 minutes +1 bonus Deals sonic damage, deafens on critical hit +1 bonus 3/day coat weapon in poison dealing 1d4 initial and secondary Str damage +1 bonus +5 on initiative +1 bonus On critical hit, target takes –4 to its Strength +1 bonus 1/day draw 5 power points from weapon when manifesting power +12,000 gp +2d6 damage against lawful creatures +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with fire subtype +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with earth subtype +2 bonus +2d6 damage against chaotic creatures +2 bonus 3/day banish struck creature back to its home plane +2 bonus 3/day gain blindsight out to 30 ft. for 1 minute +2 bonus +5 damage on each successful attack +2 bonus +1d8 damage against living creatures +2 bonus +2 on disarm attempts, you cannot be disarmed +2 bonus Struck target shaken for 1 minute +2 bonus On critical hit, target shaken for 5 rounds +2 bonus +1d6 damage of energy type of choice +2 bonus On critical hit, bestow one negative level on living target for 1 hour +2 bonus +1d6 fire damage, extra fire damage on critical hit +2 bonus Turns projectiles into force attacks; projectile weapons only +2 bonus +2d6 damage against evil creatures +2 bonus +1d6 frost damage, extra cold damage on critical hit +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures with water subtype +2 bonus As illusion bane, 1/day steal illusions +2 bonus Impedes struck target’s ability to create spell effects +2 bonus Change composition to adamantine, silver, cold iron, or steel +2 bonus Struck psionic target loses power points, nonpsionic target takes Wis damage +2 bonus On critical hit, target paralyzed for 1 round +2 bonus +1 to AC, +1 on saves +2 bonus Extra benefits against psionic creatures +2 bonus Gains enhancement bonus based on power point reserve +2 bonus +1d6 electricity, extra electricity damage on critical hit +2 bonus Stores up to 4 points of essentia for enhancement bonuses +2 bonus Extra benefits against creatures of air subtype +2 bonus Transforms to overcome target’s damage reduction +2 bonus  242  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 242  12/21/06 6:02:45 AM  Ranged Weapon Properties (cont.) Page D225 M40 M30 M31 M37 D225 D224  Item Name Unholy Prismatic burst Bodyfeeder Cursespewing Implacable Speed Brilliant energy  Effect +2d6 damage against good creatures On critical hit, target subject to prismatic spray Gain temporary hp equal to half damage dealt by critical hits On critical hit, bestows curse for 1 minute Target loses 2 hp/round for 5 rounds Extra attack with full attack Sheds light, ignores armor bonuses to AC and nonliving matter  Market Price +2 bonus +30,000 gp +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +3 bonus +4 bonus  Specific Weapons  M54 M56 M60 M53 D222 D226 M63 M48 M52 M52 M46 M51 M59 M59 M57 M50 M54 M61 M55  Morningstar of the manyR Rod of defiance Stunshot sling Mace of the dark children +2 weapon Dagger of venom Warlock’s scepter Blazing skylance Forceful skylance Ghost net Axe of ancestral virtue R Dwarf crusher Skewer-of-gnomesR Spear of retributionR Rod of the recluse R DawnstarR Pick of piercing Sword of virtue beyond reproachR Rapier of desperate measuresR  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 243  Effect Market Price (gp) +1 arrow, deals nonlethal damage and might put target to sleep 132 +2 bolt, enemies in path must make Will save or become shaken 267 Creates acid burst (2d8 damage) for 3 rounds when fired at a flat surface 306 +1 arrow, poisons target, dealing initial and secondary 1d6 Con damage 506 Becomes 5d6 lightning bolt when thrown 1,500 +1 arrow, kill one type or subtype of creature (Fort DC 20 negates) 2,282 Weapon has +1 on attack rolls and damage rolls 2,300+ +1 dagger, 3 charges, gains flaming and returning properties and other effects 2,802 Corellon Larethian: +1 composite longbow plus relic powers 3,400 +1 arrow, kill one type or subtype of creature (Fort DC 23 negates) 4,057 +1 longsword, deals extra sonic damage while using bardic music 4,310 +1 longsword, more damage when sundering if you have Improved Sunder feat 4,315 +1 spiked chain, +2 on Strength check to trip a target 4,325 +1/masterwork quarterstaff, becomes +1 longbow on command 4,600 +1 heavy crossbow, also functions as +1 battleaxe 4,660 Garl Glittergold: +1/+1 gnome hooked hammer plus relic powers 5,120 +1 whip, 2/day target subject to entangling plant attack for 3 rounds +1 dagger, cut through webs, create free-standing curtain of cobwebs 1/day +1 warhammer, on a critical hit, floor holds target in place if you have stonecunning +1 trident, 3/day calm emotions for 5 rounds +1 greatsword, 6/day launch spikes as thrown weapon Obad-Hai: +1/+1 quarterstaff plus relic powers Becomes various magic weapons, can store a message as magic mouth spell Chill touch on touch attack Ehlonna: +1 arrow plus relic powers +1 whip, 3/day target entangled as if by a net for up to 3 rounds +1 dagger, +3 on saves against enchantment and fear effects +1 kama, deals unarmed strike damage (Gharyn’s monastic array) +1 dagger, 5 charges/day, secretes poison of various strengths +1 cold iron spear, reduce target to fewer than 0 hp to gain several bonuses +1 greataxe, bane property against earth-based creatures if you are a dwarf Becomes +1 shortbow or +1 rapier Becomes +1 longbow or +1 longsword Becomes +1 composite longbow (+4 Str bonus) or +1 greatsword +1 adamantine spiked gauntlet, immune to chill metal/heat metal, 1/day stunning attack Erythnul: +1 morningstar plus relic powers +1 heavy mace, undead treated as having 4 fewer HD for turn/rebuke checks +1 sling, 3/day target stunned for 1 round +1 adamantine heavy mace, +3 on rebuke undead checks, improved rebuking ability Weapon has +2 on attack rolls and damage rolls +1 dagger, 1/day poison +1 light mace, 5 charges/day, +1 on ranged touch attack rolls, eldritch blast bonuses +1 lance, 3/day 15-ft. cone of 5d4 fire damage +1 lance, 3/day magic missile (three missiles) Incorporeal target treated as corporeal Moradin: +1 keen adamantine dwarven waraxe plus relic powers Large +1 adamantine greatclub, benefits against dwarves, constructs, earth creatures Kurtulmak: Small +1 gnome bane spear plus relic powers Gruumsh: +1 returning spear plus relic powers Lolth: +2 light mace plus relic powers Pelor: +2 morningstar plus relic powers +1 heavy pick, 3/day destroys object created of force (as disintegrate) Heironeous: +1 holy longsword plus relic powers Olidammara: +2 rapier plus relic powers  APPENDIX 1  M46 M60 M52 M62 M53 M60 M58 M59 M56 M63 M50 M201 M63 M50 M60 M31 M31 M31 M51  Item Name Sleep arrow Screaming bolt Fountainhead arrow (or bolt) Arrow (or bolt) of biting Javelin of lightning Slaying arrow +1 weapon Meteoric knife Bow of the wintermoonR Slaying arrow, greater Crystal echoblade Shatterspike Living chain Bowstaff Bladed crossbow Hooked hammer of the hearthfire R Assassin whip Spider fang Galeb duhr hammer Trident of serenity Manticore greatsword Staff of the unyielding oakR Rod of surprises Spectral dagger Raptor arrowR Whip of webs Dagger of defiance Scorpion kamaSP Viperblade Death spike Stonereaver Swordbow, light Swordbow Swordbow, great The fist  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page D228 D227 M52 M46 D226 D228 D222 M53 M48 D228 M49 D228 M53 M48 M47 M52  5,301 5,302 5,312 5,315 5,350 5,600 6,000 6,000 6,006 6,301 6,302 6,302 6,302 6,304 6,320 6,330 6,375 6,775 7,005 7,308 7,312 7,800 8,012 8,300+ 8,302 8,305 8,310 8,310 8,320 8,530 9,010 9,302 9,302 9,305 9,308 9,308 9,315 9,320  243  12/21/06 6:02:48 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Specific Weapons (cont.) Page M55 M60 D229 M210 M47 M56 M49 M58 M48 D228  Item Name Rapier of unerring directionR Sword of mighty thewsR Trident of warning Talon scepterSP Axe of the sea reavers Rod of cats Chromatic rodR Rogue blade Bow of songs Shifter’s sorrow  D236 M61 M58 D222 D226 M57 M57 D229 D237 M63 M50 M58 M49 M48 D226 D227 M53 D228 D228 D227 D262 M54 D237 D262 D227 D228 M59 D222 D237 M62 M51 D227 M56 D227 D229 D235 D222 D227 D228 D226 D226 D227 D235 D227 D234 D227 D226 D227 D245  Python rod Tentacle rod Rod of whips +3 weapon Assassin’s dagger Rod of enervating strike Rod of freedom Trident of fish command Viper rod Water whip Dagger of denialR Ruby bladeR Cudgel that never forgetsR Chain of obeisance R Flame tongue Luck blade (0 wishes) Lash of sands Sword of subtlety Sword of the planes Nine lives stealer Mattock of the titans Quarterstaff of battle Rod of withering Maul of the titans Oathbow Sword of life stealing Scourge of pain +4 weapon Rod of thunder and lightning Tentacle rod, greater Explosive sling Mace of terror Rod of celestial might Life-drinker Sylvan scimitar Rod of flailing +5 weapon Rapier of puncturing Sun blade Frost brand Dwarven thrower Luck blade (1 wish) Rod of lordly might Mace of smiting Rod of alertness Luck blade (2 wishes) Holy avenger Luck blade (3 wishes) Staff of power  Effect Market Price (gp) Fharlanghn: +1 ghost touch rapier plus relic powers 9,320 Kord: +1 dragonbane greatsword plus relic powers 9,350 +2 trident, locate aquatic predators 10,115 +1 flaming light mace, ray of fire deals 1d6 damage (regalia of the phoenix) 10,305 +1 greataxe, float on water, 1/day each, various morale bonuses and panic effects 10,320 +1/masterwork quarterstaff, various stealth-themed effects 10,600 Tiamat: +1 corrosive, frost, flaming, or shock morningstar plus relic powers 12,308 +1 rapier, 2/day blink for 6 rounds 12,320 +1 shortbow, expend bardic music for Cha bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls 12,330 +1/+1 two-bladed sword, +2d6 damage to shapechangers, 12,780 force return to natural form +1/+1 quarterstaff, transforms into python and back on command 13,000 Makes three tentacle attacks with slow effect 14,000 3/day becomes +1 dancing whip that can strike incorporeal creatures 15,000 Weapon has +3 on attack rolls and damage rolls 18,300+ +2 dagger, +1 to Fort save DC for assassin’s death attack 18,302 +1 heavy mace, various inflict wounds effects 18,312 +1 silver heavy mace, various freedom-themed effects and bonuses 18,402 +1 trident, charm, speak with animals on aquatic animals 18,650 +2 heavy mace, 1/day produces poisonous viper head on command 19,000 +1 whip, lethal damage, +1d6 fire or cold damage and difficult to disarm 20,301 Vecna: +1 unholy dagger plus relic powers 20,302 Wee Jas: +1 axiomatic dagger plus relic powers 20,302 St. Cuthbert: +1 axiomatic heavy mace plus relic powers 20,312 Hextor: +1 unholy spiked chain plus relic powers 20,400 +1 flaming burst longsword, 1/day 4d6 fire damage on ranged touch attack 20,715 +2 short sword, +1 on saving throws, power of good fortune 22,060 +1 desiccating burst whip, lethal damage, 1/day entangling attack 22,301 +1 short sword, +4 on attack rolls and damage rolls when making sneak attack 22,310 +1 longsword, enhancement bonus improves depending on plane/opponents 22,315 +2 longsword, draw life force from an opponent nine times 23,057 Gargantuan +3 adamantine warhammer, loosens earth, smashes rock 23,348 +1/+1 quarterstaff, various combat-based effects 24,600 +1 light mace, deals Str and Con damage instead of hit point damage 25,000 +3 greatclub, triple damage against inanimate objects 25,305 +2 composite longbow (+2 Str bonus), more effective against sworn enemy 25,600 +2 longsword, bestow negative level, gain 1d6 temporary hp on critical hit 25,715 +1 scourge, +1d8 nonlethal damage, pain effect for 1d4 rounds 26,320 Weapon has +4 on attack rolls and damage rolls 32,300+ +2 light mace, various thunder and lightning effects 33,000 Makes six tentacle attacks with fatigued/exhausted effect 36,000 +1 sling, +2d6 fire damage to target and creatures within 10 ft. 36,300 +2 heavy mace, 3/day affect creatures as fear spell 38,552 +1/+1 quarterstaff, 3/day holy smite attack, 1/day summon avoral guardinal 38,600 +1 greataxe, bestows 2 negative levels on target and one on you 40,320 +3 scimitar, gain Cleave, +1d6 points of damage when outdoors 47,315 Becomes +3 dire flail on command, 1/day +4 to AC and on saving throws 50,000 Weapon has +5 on attack rolls and damage rolls 50,300+ +2 wounding rapier, 3/day +1d6 Con damage on touch attack 50,320 +2 bastard sword, wielded as short sword, +4 against evil creatures, 1/day sunlight 50,335 +3 frost greatsword, shines light when under 0°F, grants protection from fire 54,475 +2 warhammer, additional benefits if you are a dwarf 60,312 +2 short sword, +1 on saving throws, power of good fortune, one wish 62,360 Transforms into various magic weapons, several other effects 70,000 +3 adamantine heavy mace, more effective against constructs and outsiders 75,312 +1 light mace, +1 on initiative, various detection and other effects 85,000 +2 short sword, +1 on saving throws, power of good fortune, two wishes 102,660 +2 cold iron longsword, +5 holy cold iron longsword for paladin, other benefits 120,630 +2 short sword, +1 on saving throws, power of good fortune, three wishes 142,960 +2/masterwork quarterstaff, create various powerful effects 211,000  244  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 244  12/21/06 6:02:50 AM  Weapon Crystals Page M34 M34  M65 M65 M66 M66 M66 M64 M64 M64 M65 M65 M66  Market Price (gp) 100 300  Draw weapon as free action +2 on checks made to draw a weapon or keep it in your hand Weapon sheds bright light to 20 ft., shadowy illumination to 40 ft. Heal 1 damage every time you damage a living creature, up to 10 damage per day Invisible struck target surrounded by glowing aura for 1 round +1 on weapon damage roll when delivering spell via melee attack Target takes 1 point of fire damage next round +1 point of specific energy damage to attack Weapon sheds bright light to 60 ft., shadowy illumination to 120 ft. Draw weapon as free action, call weapon from up to 30 ft. away +5 on checks made to draw a weapon or keep it in your hand +1d6 to weapon damage against constructs +1d6 to weapon damage against evil outsiders As least revelation crystal and invisibility suppressed for 1 round Weapon deals +1d6 damage to undead +5 to hardness of weapon  300 300 400 400 400 500 500 600 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,400  Heal 3 damage every time you damage a living creature, up to 30 damage per day +1 on attack roll and weapon damage roll when delivering spell via melee attack Target takes 3 points of fire damage next round +1d6 points of specific energy damage to attack +10 on checks made to draw a weapon or keep it in your hand +1d6 on weapon damage against constructs, overcomes DR as adamantine +1d6 on weapon damage against evil outsiders, overcomes DR as good +10 to hardness of weapon  1,500 2,000 2,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,000 3,400  APPENDIX 1  M64 M64 M65 M64 M65 M65 M65 M64  Effect Weapon sheds bright light to 5 ft., shadowy illumination to 10 ft. +2 to hardness of weapon  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  M65 M65 M64 M64 M66 M64 M65 M64 M64 M65 M65 M65 M65 M66 M66 M64  Item Name Crystal of illumination, least Crystal of adamant weaponry, least Crystal of return, least Crystal of security, least Crystal of illumination, lesser Crystal of life drinking, least Revelation crystal, least Crystal of arcane steel, least Phoenix ash threat, least Crystal of energy assault, least Crystal of illumination, greater Crystal of return, lesser Crystal of security, lesser Demolition crystal, least Fiendslayer crystal, least Revelation crystal, lesser Truedeath crystal, least Crystal of adamant weaponry, lesser Crystal of life drinking, lesser Crystal of arcane steel, lesser Phoenix ash threat, lesser Crystal of energy assault, lesser Crystal of security, greater Demolition crystal, lesser Fiendslayer crystal, lesser Crystal of adamant weaponry, greater Crystal of return, greater Fiendslayer crystal, greater  As lesser crystal of return and weapon gains returning property 4,000 As lesser fiendslayer crystal and struck evil outsider can’t teleport 5,000 for 1 round on critical hit Revelation crystal, greater As lesser revelation crystal and concealment effects suppressed for 1 round 5,000 Truedeath crystal, lesser Weapon deals +1d6 damage to undead, functions as ghost touch weapon 5,000 Witchlight reservoir Enhance melee weapon in various ways, 5 enhanced strikes/8 hours of charging 5,000 Crystal of arcane steel, greater As lesser crystal of arcane steel and +1 to save DC of spell 6,000 Crystal of energy assault, greater +1d6 points of specific energy damage to attack, plus secondary effect 6,000 Crystal of life drinking, greater Heal 5 damage every time you damage a living creature, up to 50 damage/day 6,000 Demolition crystal, greater As lesser demolition crystal and can score sneak attacks and 6,000 critical hits against constructs Phoenix ash threat, greater Target takes 5 points of fire damage next round 6,000 Truedeath crystal, greater As lesser truedeath crystal and can score sneak attacks and critical hits against undead 10,000  Arms Page M72 D250 M192 M81 M80 M113 M80 M84 M108 M108 M80 M81 M90 M202 M112  Item Name Armband of elusive action Bracers of armor +1 Armband of confrontationSP Bracers of quick strike Bracers of great collision Inquisitor bracers Bracers of the entangling blast Caduceus bracers Goodberry bracelet Greatreach bracers Bracers of arcane freedom Bracers of opportunity Counterstrike bracers Bands of blood rage SP Hexbands  M119 M80  Rapidstrike bracers Bracers of the blast barrier  Effect Market Price (gp) 1/day avoid provoking attack of opportunity 800 +1 enhancement bonus to AC 1,000 Fighting challenge lasts an extra 3 rounds ( five virtues) 1,400 1/day make one additional attack after a full attack action 1,400 2/day deal extra damage on a critical hit with a bludgeoning weapon 1,500 3/day cure moderate wounds along with next melee attack before end of turn 1,500 Next spell cast deals half damage and entangles target 2,000 Sacrifice 5 points of healing to remove 1 point of ability damage or a condition 2,000 Create five berries per day as goodberry spell 2,000 3/day +10 ft. to reach for 1 round 2,000 2/day omit somatic component of next spell cast before end of turn 2,300 2/day always take attacks of opportunity, extra benefits with Combat Reflexes 2,300 2/day take one free attack of opportunity after enemy’s failed melee attack 2,500 3/day grant blood rage to allies (instruments of the blood gift) 2,600 +1 to save DC of hexblade’s curse, 5/day add Cha modifier to 3,100 weapon damage against cursed target 3/day +2 on attack rolls made as part of a flurry of blows 3,100 3/day turn a spell or spell-like ability into a wall of magical energy 3,200  245  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 245  12/21/06 6:02:53 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Arms (cont.) Page M137 M117 M133 M79 D250 M81 M72 M194 D250 M198 M82 M90 M93  Item Name Spellmight bracers Mithral bells Shadow maniple Bracers of accuracy Bracers of armor +2 Bracers of repulsion Armbands of might Bracers of aerial combat SP Bracers of archery, lesser Bracers of blinding strike SP Bracers of retaliation Crimson dragonhide bracers Deathstrike bracers  M120 M93 M139 M72 M144 D250 M82  Reciprocal bracers Deathguardian bracers Strongarm bracers Armband of maximized healing Vambraces of warding Bracers of armor +3 Bracers of wind  M206 M147 M112 D250 D250 D250 D250 M80 D250 D250 D250  Bracers of lightningSP Wand bracelet Incarnum focus (bracers) Bracers of armor +4 Bracelet of friends Bracers of archery, greater Bracers of armor +5 Bracers of dawn Bracers of armor +6 Bracers of armor +7 Bracers of armor +8  Effect Market Price (gp) Take –5 penalty on attack roll for a touch attack spell to deal +1d6 damage 3,300 +2 on Perform, throw to create sound burst 11 times 3,700 3/day healed of damage equal to level of shadow spell or mystery cast 3,700 3 charges/day, deliver ranged attacks with extreme precision 4,000 +2 enhancement bonus to AC 4,000 3/day, push creatures back 5 ft. 4,000 +2 on Str checks and Str-based skill checks, extra benefits with Power Attack 4,100 +1 on attack rolls while you or foe are airborne (array of the manticore) 5,000 Use all bows, +1 on attack rolls using bows with which you are proficient 5,000 +2 on initiative, 3/day extra attack in addition to full attack ( fleet warrior’s array) 5,000 +1 to AC, 3/day sacrifice a spell slot to daze attacker for 1 round 5,000 Resistance to fire 5, +1 enhancement bonus to natural armor 5,000 3/day use melee weapons to deal critical hits or sneak attacks 5,000 to creatures immune to such attacks for 1 round 2/day automatic critical threat after taking critical hit or sneak attack damage 5,000 Sacrifice spell slot to gain DR (2 × level of spell slot)/— 6,000 Wield weapons as if one size category larger than normal 6,000 3/day next healing spell of 6th level or lower is maximized 7,200 +2 to AC against ranged attacks for good-aligned wearers 8,000 +3 enhancement bonus to AC 9,000 Ranged attacks against you take a –2 penalty as if fired in strong wind, 10,000 +1 on ranged attacks Attacks deal +1d6 electricity damage, works in wild shape (raiment of the stormwalker) 11,000 Store and retrieve up to four items of no more than 3 lb. each 12,000 +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying arms chakra 15,000 +4 enhancement bonus to AC 16,000 Four friends can be summoned once each 19,000 Use all bows, +2 on attack, +1 on damage using bows with which you are proficient 25,000 +5 enhancement bonus to AC 25,000 Project beam of normal light; 4/day searing light 26,000 +6 enhancement bonus to AC 36,000 +7 enhancement bonus to AC 49,000 +8 enhancement bonus to AC 64,000  Body (Non-Armor) Page D265 M104 M130 D266 M130 M112 M133 M129 M136 D265 D265 M129 M206 D265 D265 D265  Item Name Robe of bones Ghost shroud Robe of retaliation Robe of useful items Robe of mysterious conjuration Incarnum focus (robe) Shadow veil Robe of arcane might Shroud of scales Robe of scintillating colors Robe of blending Robe of the inferno Robe of thunderSP Robe of stars Robe of the archmagi Robe of eyes  Effect Market Price (gp) Create a number of undead creatures 2,400 +1 to AC; all your melee attacks affect incorporeal creatures 5,000 3/day upon taking damage, sacrifice arcane spell or spell slot to deal damage 6,500 Create a number of mundane items 7,000 3/day sacrifice spell slot to use summon monster spell of same level 10,000 +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying soul chakra 15,000 +1 to AC; concealment in shadowy areas 16,000 +4 armor bonus to AC; +1 to caster level for spells of a specific school 21,000 DR 5/magic, immune to dragon’s frightful presence 24,000 Colors daze surrounding creatures, conceal wearer, illuminate area 27,000 +10 on Hide, disguise self at will 30,000 +4 armor bonus to AC; create fiery orbs that can be thrown 37,000 Gain sonic-related benefits, works in wild shape (raiment of the stormwalker) 38,000 Travel to Astral Plane, +1 on saving throws, use up to six +5 shuriken 58,000 Various resistance, spellcasting, and defensive bonuses 75,000 See all things within 120 ft., various vision-related effects 120,000  Page M113 M118 M141 D257 M136  Item Name Lenses of bright vision Pearl of speech Third eye improvisation Goggles of minute seeing Snakeblood tooth  M75 M215 M72 M108  Blighter’s hex-eye Lenses of revelationSP Artificer’s monocle Goggles of lifesight  Effect Market Price (gp) 3/day project 15-ft. cone of bright light from eyes 600 Speak and understand one specific language, 1/day command 600 1/day +5 on one check in a skill in which you’re untrained 1,000 +5 bonus on Search for concealed objects within 1 ft. 1,250 +5 on saves against ingested poison; 3 charges/day, 1,350 various protections against poison 3/day +2d6 points of damage against elves and plants for 1 round 1,400 Reveals foe as undead or evil outsider (vestments of divinity) 1,400 Use artificer knowledge or detect magic to determine abilities of magic item 1,500 3/day know whether creatures are living, dead, or neither 2,000  Face  246  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 246  12/21/06 6:02:56 AM  Face (cont.) Effect Market Price (gp) Breathe in unclean air, +5 on saves against stench attacks and inhaled poisons 2,000 3 charges/day, bonuses on Str- and Dex-based checks and weapon damage 2,100 +5 on a specific type of Knowledge check 2,500 Speak, read, and write five specific languages 2,500 +5 on Search 2,500 Ignore enemies’ AC bonus from cover 2,500 +5 on Spellcraft to decipher scrolls and Use Magic Device to use scrolls 2,500 1/day reduce numeric effects of next power or spell affecting you to minimum 2,500 +5 on Sense Motive 2,500 1/day freedom of movement for 1 round 2,600 +5-ft. speed, benefit of Run feat in light or no armor (Gharyn’s monastic array) 2,700 3/day see invisibility for 1 round or gain Blind-Fight for 1 minute 3,000 1/day negates confused, dazed, fascinated, or stunned condition 3,000 +1 on Spot, flanking foes get only +1 bonus, –2 on saves against gaze attacks 3,200 Rage lasts 1 round longer; 2/day ranged touch attack deals 4d6 acid damage 3,300 +5 on Search and +5 on Survival while tracking 3,500 +5 on Intimidate, 1/day command (armor of the watching master) 3,500 +5 on Spot, immune to blinding and dazzling effects (regalia of the phoenix) 3,500 2/day see invisibility for 5 minutes 4,000 Immune to blinding, dazzling; 3/day fireball (raiment of the four) 4,000 +3 on saving throws against mind-affecting spells and abilities 4,000 Gain benefit of Track feat, low-light vision (garb of the hunting cat) 4,000 Operate without penalty in preternaturally bright light 4,500 +5 on Bluff, continuous undetectable alignment; 3/day disguise self 4,500 2/day omit verbal component of next enchantment or illusion spell 5,000 +5 on Spot; 1/day true seeing for 1 round 5,500 +5 on Appraise, 3/day identify 6,500 Confuse creature affected by your enchantment spell (seven veils) 7,000 1/day send dream or nightmare to a sleeping creature 7,500 +2 on caster level checks to overcome spell resistance 8,000 Make bite attacks; 3/day stun creature you bite 8,300 Blindsight out to 30 ft., immune to sight-based effects 9,000 +10 on Search 10,000 +10 on Sense Motive 10,000 +10 on Intimidate 10,000 +4 on Will saving throws 10,000 +10 on Psicraft 10,000 Ignore effects of concealment on any creature within 30 ft. for 1 round 10,000 1/day drain 1d6 power points from target per round, 7 consecutive rounds/day 10,000 +10 on Spot to penetrate disguise, 1/day force creature to assume true form 10,000 Bind soulmelds to brow chakra 10,000 +10 on Spot 10,000 +10 on Concentrate 10,000 +10 on Gather Information 10,000 1/day borrow one power from a psionic target for 70 minutes 10,000 Darkvision out to 60 ft. 12,000 +5 on Search and Spot, artificers can power the goggles with infusions 13,000 +2 to save DCs of enchantment spells and Cha-based supernatural abilities 14,000 +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying brow chakra 15,000 +5 on Listen and Spot, darkvision out to 30 ft. 15,000 1/day dispel magic 15,000 Various vision-enhancing effects; 1/day blindsense out to 30 ft. for 1 minute 16,000 Darkvision out to 30 ft.; +1 on attack and damage rolls with ranged weapons 18,000 +9 on Search and Spot 20,000 1/day drain 1d6 power points from target per round, 13 consecutive rounds/day 20,000 1/day mask flies up to 50 ft., attacks a creature as finger of death 22,000 Petrify creature affected by your transmutation spell (seven veils) 22,000 See and hear a known, distant location, at will 24,000 Use doom (one lens), use fear and deathwatch (both lenses) 25,000 Charm person at will 56,000 Petrification gaze attack 10 rounds/day 98,000 Protected from devices and effects that detect or affect emotions or thoughts 120,000 1/day dominate monster within 60 ft. 120,000  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Mask of sweet air Third eye surge Crystal mask of knowledge Crystal mask of languages Eyes of the eagle Goggles of foefinding Spellsight spectacles Third eye dampening Third eye expose Third eye freedom Panther mask SP Corsair’s eyepatch Third eye clarity Eyes of expanded vision Mask of blood Lens of detection Mask of masterySP Raptor’s mask SP Dragon mask Goggles of the golden sunSP Mask of mental armor Mask of the tigerSP Goggles of day Mask of lies Mask of silent trickery Eyes of truth Monocle of perusal Veil of whispersSP Dreaming blindfold Third eye penetrate Fanged mask Blindfold of true darkness Crystal mask of detection Crystal mask of discernment Crystal mask of dread Crystal mask of mindarmor Crystal mask of psionic craft Crystal mask of visual insight Eyes of power leech Lenses of true form Soulstone Third eye aware Third eye concentrate Third eye gather Third eye powerthieve Goggles of night Cannith goggles Veil of allure Incarnum focus (goggles) Moonstone mask Third eye repudiate Goggles of draconic vision Goggles of the ebon hunter Crystal mask of insight Eyes of power leech, vampiric Mask of the skull Turquoise veilSP Third eye sense Eyes of doom Eyes of charming Eyes of petrification Third eye conceal Third eye dominate  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M116 M143 M91 M91 D256 M108 M138 M141 M141 M141 M201 M90 M141 M98 M115 D261 M193 M210 M94 M205 M115 M200 M107 M115 M116 M99 M117 M213 M96 M142 M99 M75 M90 M90 M91 M92 M92 M92 M98 M113 M137 M140 M141 M141 M142 D258 M84 M145 M112 M118 M142 M107 M108 M91 M98 D262 M212 M142 D256 D256 D256 M141 M141  247  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 247  12/21/06 6:02:58 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Feet Page M77 M76 M78 M67 M71 M168 M201 M77 M78 M76 M94 M130 M131 D250 M77 D250 M77 M145 M136 M119 M79 D266 M78 M79 D250 M76 M78 M109 M78 D250 M198 M131 M79 D250 M121 M112 D250 M78  Item Name Boots of landing Boots of agile leaping Boots of stomping Acrobat boots Anklet of translocation Steadfast boots Cobra strapsSP Boots of dragonstriding Boots of the mountain king Boots of the battle charger Dimension stride boots Rock boots Sandals of sprinting Boots of elvenkind Boots of jumping Boots of the winterlands Boots of desperation Vanguard treads Skirmisher boots Quicksilver boots Boots of the unending journeyR Slippers of spider climbing Boots of swift passage Boots of tremorsense Boots of striding and springing Boots of big stepping Boots of sidestepping Gwaeron’s boots Boots of skating Boots of levitation Sandals of the light stepSP Sandals of springing Boots of tracklessness Boots of speed Riding boots Incarnum focus (boots) Winged boots Boots of the mountain king, greater M79 Boots of temporal acceleration D250 Boots of teleportation M206 Cloudwalker ankletsSP  Effect Market Price (gp) Always land on your feet, 2 fewer dice of falling damage than normal 500 Add Dex modifier on Jump, stand from prone more easily 600 3/day topple creatures in 15-ft. cone 600 3 charges, bonuses to land speed; +2 on Tumble 900 2/day teleport 10 ft. 1,400 +4 bonus to resist being moved, constantly set against charge 1,400 After unarmed charge attack, move 5 ft. (Gharyn’s monastic array) 1,400 +2 on Climb and Jump; 1/day gain climb speed equal to land speed for 10 rounds 1,500 Ignore some movement-based penalties and skill checks 1,500 2/day charge as standard action 2,000 +2 on Jump; 5 charges/day, teleport up to 60 ft. 2,000 +4 on Str checks to avoid bull rushes or trips; 5/day ignore difficult terrain 2,000 3/day +30 ft. enhancement bonus to land speed until start of next turn 2,300 +5 on Move Silently 2,500 Running jump more easily; 3 charges/day, bonus on Jump 2,500 Move across ice and snow at normal speed, endure cold 2,500 3/day gain movement and dodge bonuses when at half hit points or lower 2,800 Various stability- and movement-based effects 3,100 Make more effective skirmish attacks and mobile attacks 3,200 2/day make an extra move up to land speed, even over liquid 3,500 Fharlanghn: +10-ft. enhancement bonus to speed plus relic powers 4,000 Walk on walls or ceiling with speed 20 ft. 4,800 5/day teleport 20 ft. 5,000 3/day tremorsense out to 30 ft. for 5 rounds 5,000 +10-ft. enhancement bonus to speed, +5 on Jump 5,500 +2 caster level with teleportation spells; 1/day teleport up to 60 ft. 6,000 3/day take one free 5-foot step 6,000 Continuous pass without trace, undetectable by scent 6,000 +10-ft. enhancement bonus to land speed, +20-ft. bonus on decline 7,000 Levitate at will 7,500 Various free movement effects ( fleet warrior’s array) 9,000 +10 on Jump 10,000 Leave no tracks; 1/day become invisible as greater invisibility for 7 rounds 11,000 Haste self 10 rounds total per day 12,000 +5 on Ride during combat, other mounted combat bonuses 12,000 +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying feet chakra 15,000 3/day fly for 5 minutes 16,000 Ignore some movement-based penalties and skill checks; 1/day stoneskin 21,500 1/day enter another time frame for 2 rounds 3/day teleport Air walk, works in wild shape (raiment of the stormwalker)  43,000 49,000 50,000  Hands Page M72 M83 M120 M82 M102 M107 M113 M204 M62 M93 M101 M103 M103 M104 M105 M106 M105 M121 M105 M106  Item Name Arcanist’s gloves Brute gauntlets Reach gauntlets Brawler’s gauntlets Gauntlets of energy transformation Gloves of spell disruption Lightning gauntlets Gloves of the starry skySP Adamantine mind blade gauntlets Devastation gauntlets Gauntlets of arrow reflection Gauntlets of extended range Gauntlets of giantfelling Gauntlets of throwing Gloves of fortunate striking Gloves of lightning Gloves of agile striking Repelling gauntlets Gloves of eldritch admixture Gloves of manual prowess  Effect Market Price (gp) 2/day +2 to caster level of next 1st-level arcane spell cast before end of turn 500 3 charges/day, bonuses on Str checks, Str-based skill checks, melee damage 500 3/day expend 1 power point to extend melee reach by 5 ft. until end of turn 500 3/day +2 on grapple checks and damage with unarmed strikes for 1 round 1,000 3/day change energy type produced by any weapon you hold for 1 round 1,000 Enhances ability to interrupt opponents’ spells 1,000 3 charges/day, deal electricity damage to adjacent target 1,000 Emits light, 3/day magic missile (raiment of the four) 1,100 Mind blade is granted powers akin to adamantine 2,000 3 charges/day, bonus damage on critical hits 2,000 3/day redirect ranged weapons toward attacker if you have Deflect Arrows 2,000 Doubles range increment of thrown weapons and objects 2,000 3/day gain bonus on next damage roll against creature larger than you 2,000 3/day grant melee weapon throwing and returning abilities 2,000 1/day reroll 1 attack roll 2,000 3/day ranged touch attack dealing 1d8+5 points of electricity damage 2,000 2/day +1d6 damage with ranged and light weapons, +2d6 during skirmish attacks 2,200 1/day repel and halt an enemy moving into a square adjacent to you 2,300 3 charges/day, bonus energy damage with eldritch blasts 2,500 3 charges/day, bonuses to some Dex-based skill checks 3,000  248  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 248  12/21/06 6:03:01 AM  Hands (cont.) Effect Market Price (gp) Learn details of object’s previous owner 3,000 Uninvest essentia for attack bonuses when using smite opposition 3,000 Create ray of frost at will; 3/day melee weapon gains frost property for 5 rounds 3,100 3/day next spell deals additional 1d6 slashing damage per spell level 3,200 Swim speed 30 ft., can always take 10 on Swim, can run while swimming 3,500 1/day +20 on next attack made before end of next turn 3,500 Masterwork spiked gauntlets, 3/day gain rending effect 3,610 Ignore miss chance, +1d6 melee damage to incorporeal creatures (wraith’s woe) 4,000 +2 enhancement bonus to Str 4,000 Bahamut: Natural claw attacks plus relic powers 4,000 2/day gain the benefit of the Snatch Arrows feat 4,000 +2 enhancement bonus to Dex 4,000 1/day force enemy to reroll save with penalty (instruments of the blood gift) 4,500 3/day imbue eldritch blasts with specific energy type 5,000 3/day melee touch attack with slow effect that lasts 5 rounds 5,000 +2 enhancement bonus to DC of Stunning Fist attacks 5,000 +1 punching daggers, extra benefits when you charge or Spring Attack 5,604 (garb of the hunting cat) Hextor: +1 spiked gauntlets plus relic powers 5,120 Weapons overcome damage reduction as silver weapons 6,000 3/day imbue a melee weapon with poison effective on next attack 6,000 +5 on Swim and Climb 6,250  M101 M104 M144 D257 M101 M101 M192 M194 M105 M105 M106 M116 M101 M95 M104 D257 M117 M139  Gauntlets of the blood-lordR Gauntlets of weaponry arcane Toxic gloves Gloves of swimming and climbing Gauntlets of the blazing arc Gauntlet of infinite blades Gauntlets of destructionSP Gloves of endless javelinsSP Gloves of flame Gloves of the balanced hand Gloves of incarnum theft Mesmerist’s gloves Gauntlet of Gruumsh Dragonfang gauntlets Ghoul gauntlets Glove of storing Mind blade gauntlet, lesser Storm gauntlets  M103 D257 M107 M112 D257 M84 M117 D257 M117  Gauntlets of mindfire Gauntlet of rust Gloves of the titan’s grip Incarnum focus (gauntlets) Gloves of Dexterity +4 Casting glove Mind blade gauntlet Gloves of Dexterity +6 Mind blade gauntlet, greater  3/day create cone-shaped burst of flame that deals 4d4+4 fire damage Creates mundane dagger; 5 charges/day, creates magic daggers +2 to Str, 3/day treat attack as adamantine (armor of the watching master) Create temporary +1 javelins (array of the manticore) Resistance to cold 5 and endure elements against cold; 5/day flame effects Fight as with Two-Weapon Fighting, additional bonuses for those with the feat Steal 1 point of essentia from target with unarmed melee touch attack 2/day affect one extra target with an enchantment spell of 3rd level or lower +1 gauntlet, 3/day make melee touch attack to blind target for 1 hour +2 enhancement bonus to Strength, various attack-based bonuses and effects 1/round make melee touch attack with paralysis effect Stores one item in stasis Mind blade manifests with a specific weapon property with price modifier +1 +1 spiked gauntlets, resistance to electricity 5; 4 charges/day, various electricity-based effects 1/day create cone of mindfire sickness 1/day affect object as rusting grasp, wearer and gear protected from rust 3/day +8 on grapple checks for 7 rounds +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying hands chakra +4 enhancement bonus to Dex Store item in stasis, can activate or consume stored item Mind blade manifests with a specific weapon property with price modifier +2 +6 enhancement bonus to Dex Mind blade manifests with a specific weapon property with price modifier +3  Item Name Watch lamp Burning veilSP Phylactery of faithfulness Bear helm Headband of the lorebinder Hat of disguise Headband of conscious effort Helm of battle Helm of tacticsSP Circlet of solace Essentia helm Scout’s headband Headband of intellect +2 Circlet of wild surging Circlet of persuasion  Effect Market Price (gp) Creates torchlike light at shoulder 500 Deal 1d6 fire damage to target damaged by your fire spell (seven veils) 1,000 Know if something could adversely affect your alignment or standing with deity 1,000 1/day take half damage from one sneak attack or critical hit while raging 1,500 +4 on bardic knowledge checks, 3/day read magic 1,600 Disguise self at will 1,800 1/day make a Concentration check in place of a required Fortitude save 2,000 3/day +2 on next bull rush, disarm, overrun, sunder, or trip attempt 2,000 3/day +1 to minor aura or allies deal +2 damage to flanked foes (regalia of the hero) 2,000 3/day next healing spell also grants +5 on various saving throws for 1 minute 3,000 3 charges/day, temporarily adds essentia to essentia receptacles 3,000 +2 on Spot; 3 charges/day, provides vision-based bonuses 3,400 +2 enhancement bonus to Int 4,000 3/day when using wild surge while manifesting a power, +1 to manifester level 4,200 +3 on Charisma-based checks 4,500  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Gloves of object reading Soulsmite gauntlets Gloves of the uldra savant Hellcat gauntlets Finned gauntlets True strike gauntlets Rending gauntlets Gauntlets of ghost fightingSP Gauntlets of ogre power Gauntlets of the talonR Gloves of arrow snaring Gloves of Dexterity +2 Barbs of retributionSP Gauntlets of eldritch energy Gauntlets of lassitude Ki straps Claw glovesSP  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M107 M136 M107 M111 M100 M144 M121 M216 D257 M103 D257 D257 M203 M102 M103 M113 M199  6,300 6,500 6,610 7,000 7,000 8,000 8,000 8,000 8,302 8,610 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,604 11,000 11,500 14,000 15,000 16,000 20,000 24,000 36,000 42,000  Head Page M147 M211 D264 M72 M110 D258 M109 M111 M208 M87 M97 M132 D258 M87 D252  249  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 249  12/21/06 6:03:03 AM  Head (cont.)  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Page M111 M86 M111 M119 D259  Item Name Helm of the purple plume R Circlet of mages Helm of gazes Platinum helmR Helm of comprehend languages and read magic M111 Helm of glorious recovery M111 Helm of heroes M97 Executioner’s hoodR D252 Circlet of blasting, minor M193 Helm of wounding sight SP M118 Phoenix helm M215 Phylactery of virtue SP M114 Lore gem M112 Horned helm M117 Mindvault M209 Crown of flamesSP M194 Helm of the hunterSP M71 Angelhelm M99 Fiendhelm D264 Phylactery of undead turning M109 Hat of anonymity M75 Blindhelm M86 Circlet of rapid casting M112 Incarnum focus (circlet) D258 Headband of intellect +4 M139 Surge crystal M73 Beholder crown D252 Circlet of blasting, major D259 Helm of underwater action D259 Helm of telepathy D258 Headband of intellect +6 D259 Helm of teleportation D258 Helm of brilliance  Effect Market Price (gp) Heironeous: +2 enhancement bonus to Cha plus relic powers 4,500 +2 on Concentration; 3 charges/day, retain spell slots after casting 5,000 3/day absorb gaze attack requiring a save 5,000 Bahamut: Immunity to frightful presence of evil dragons plus relic powers 5,000 Understand all languages and text, +5 on Decipher Script for 5,200 incomplete messages 1/day heals 4d8+7 points of damage 5,600 1/day use grant move action ability to grant allies melee attacks instead 5,600 Erythnul: Coup de grace as standard action plus relic powers 6,000 1/day searing light 6,480 Light at will, 3/day 60-ft. blinding fire cone (armor of the watching master) 6,500 Low-light vision; 1/day each feather fall, resist energy, speak with animals (birds) 6,500 +2 bonus on some saves, 2/day death ward (vestments of divinity) 6,500 +2 on all Knowledge, acts as a spellbook with a capacity of 30 spell levels 7,500 Gain secondary gore attack dealing 1d8 damage + 1/2 Str bonus 8,000 1/day immune to mind-affecting effects but dazed for 1 round 8,000 +2 to Cha, 1/day fire shield for 5 rounds (regalia of the phoenix) 8,500 +5 on Spot, Far Shot, 1/day vision bonuses for 4 hours (array of the manticore) 9,000 Emulate certain traits of celestial beings 10,000 Emulate certain traits of evil extraplanar creatures 10,000 Turn undead as if four levels higher 11,000 +5 on Hide, under continuous nondetection effect 12,500 Blindsense out to 5 ft., +5 bonus on saves against gaze attacks 15,000 3 charges/day, cast spells as swift actions 15,000 +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying crown chakra 15,000 +4 enhancement bonus to Int 16,000 5 charges/day, increase manifester level for next power manifested in round 18,000 Create ray effects as a beholder 20,000 1/day maximized searing light 23,760 See five times farther underwater, breathe underwater on command 24,000 Detect thoughts at will, send telepathic messages, 1/day suggestion 27,000 +6 enhancement bonus to Int 36,000 3/day teleport 73,500 Create various energy- and light-based effects 125,000  Rings Page M122 M122 M122 M123 M124 M126 D232 M127 D232 M83 D230 D232 D233 D233 M114 M126 M206  Item Name Ring of brief blessing Ring of communication Ring of the darkhidden Ring of floating Ring of four winds Ring of piercing spells Ring of protection +1 Ring of silent spells Ring of feather falling Brute ring Ring of climbing Ring of jumping Ring of sustenance Ring of swimming Lockpicking ring Ring of mystic healing Stormfire ringSP  D230 M128 M122 M125 M123 M121 M123 M127 M128 M125  Ring of counterspells Ring of vengeance Ring of arming Ring of master artifice, lesser Ring of the forcewall Ring of adamantine touch Ring of essentia Ring of thunderclaps Ring of water breathing Ring of mystic defiance  Effect Market Price (gp) 1/day weapon attack or unarmed strike considered magic and good-aligned 1,000 Can hear all words spoken by wearers of attuned rings within 1 mile 2,000 Invisible to darkvision 2,000 Float on any liquid, rise at speed of 30 ft. if underwater 2,000 4/day +2 to AC against a single attack or gain feather fall 2,000 3/day next melee touch spell that targets flanked foe deals +2d6 damage 2,000 +1 deflection bonus to AC 2,000 1/day create silence effect and while in that area, you can cast spells silently 2,000 Triggers feather fall if you fall more than 5 ft. 2,200 2/day blast of force makes bull rush attack against opponent 2,300 +5 on Climb 2,500 +5 on Jump 2,500 Nourished, 2 hours of sleep gives benefit of 8 hours 2,500 +5 on Swim 2,500 +5 on Open Lock, 1/day knock 3,500 +1 caster level with healing spells; 3 charges/day, healing spells more potent 3,500 5/day faerie fire deals damage for 5 rounds, works in wild shape 4,000 (raiment of the stormwalker) Counter a stored spell of 1st to 6th level 4,000 3/day when critical hit is scored on you, attacker takes 5d6 points of damage 4,500 Swap current armor and weapons with another set stored inside ring, at will 5,000 Gain 1 bonus 1st-level and 2nd-level infusion per day 5,000 3 charges/day, creates 10-ft.-square wall of force 5,100 Melee attacks treated as adamantine for overcoming DR 6,000 Ring can hold 1 point of essentia 6,000 3/day 1d8+5 electricity damage with melee touch attack; 1/day shout 6,000 Breathe freely underwater 6,000 3/day ignore up to 10 points of damage from a spell or spell-like ability 7,500  250  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 250  12/21/06 6:03:06 AM  Rings (cont.)  M125 D233 D233 D232 D233 D233 D233 M128 D230 M128 D231  Effect Market Price (gp) +1 caster level with fire spells; 3 charges/day, fire spells more damaging 7,500 +1 caster level with electricity spells; 3 charges/day, electricity spells more damaging 7,500 1/day neutralize poison, self only 8,000 Create entropic shield effect for 1 round after moving at least 10 ft. 8,000 Immune to detect thoughts, discern lies, magical discernments of alignment 8,000 +2 deflection bonus to AC 8,000 Generate shieldlike wall of force on command 8,500 Creates force effect that can make bull rush attacks, open heavy doors 8,600 3/day +20 to AC until beginning of next turn 10,000 +10 on Climb 10,000 +10 on Jump 10,000 +10 on Swim 10,000 +10 on Autohypnosis 10,000 +1 to AC; stores up to 2 points of essentia for extra bonuses 10,000 Charm animal at will 10,800 3/day 5d6 electricity damage to creatures within 5 ft. 11,500 Resistance 10 to one type of energy 12,000 Aware of all spellcasting in area; 1/day dispel magic as a counterspell 12,000 +10 on Hide, disguise self at will 12,700 Continuous water walk 15,000 Communication and diplomacy bonuses when dealing with dragon creatures 16,000 Counter a stored spell of 1st–6th level, 1/day attempt to counterspell one spell 16,000 Resistance 10 to specific energy, 1/day reflect spells of that energy type 18,000 Gain resistance to cold 20 but gain vulnerability to fire 18,000 +3 deflection bonus to AC 18,000 Cast up to three levels of spells stored in the ring 18,000 3 charges/day, protected from energy drain and ability drain 20,000 +1 to arcane caster level 20,000 Invisibility at will 20,000 Doubles 1st-level spells per day 20,000 Grants evasion ability 25,000 Gain 1 bonus 3rd-level and 4th-level infusion per day 25,000 See into and through solid matter 25,000 +1 to AC; stores up to 4 points of essentia for extra bonuses 26,000 Blink at will Resistance 20 to one type of energy 3/day become nearly undetectable for 2 rounds +5 armor bonus to AC, attackers take damage, bonuses against incorporeal +4 deflection bonus to AC Various protections against negative energy Various protections against positive energy Continuous freedom of movement Doubles 2nd-level spells per day Resistance 30 to one type of energy 9 charges, heals you at 0 hp or fewer, or succeed on one failed save per day Use shield other on wearer of mated ring, at will +5 deflection bonus to AC Create various light- and lightning-themed effects Cast up to five levels of spells stored in the ring Resistance 10 to all types of energy  APPENDIX 1  D230 D232 M128 M128 D232 M126 M126 D232 D233 D232 M126 D232 D232 D232 D233 M128  Item Name Ring of mystic fire Ring of mystic lightning Ring of antivenom Ring of entropic deflection Ring of mind shielding Ring of protection +2 Ring of force shield Ring of the ram Ring of avoidance Ring of improved climbing Ring of improved jumping Ring of improved swimming Ring of self-sufficiency Ring of soulbound protection Ring of animal friendship Ring of lightning flashes Ring of energy resistance, minor Ring of spell-battle Ring of chameleon power Ring of water walking Ring of dragon friendship Ring of greater counterspells Ring of divergence Ring of the icy soul Ring of protection +3 Ring of spell storing, minor Bone ring Ring of arcane might Ring of invisibility Ring of wizardry I Ring of evasion Ring of master artifice Ring of X-ray vision Ring of soulbound protection, greater Ring of blinking Ring of energy resistance, major Ring of vanishing Rings of force armor (pair) Ring of protection +4 Ring of negative protection Ring of positive protection Ring of freedom of movement Ring of wizardry II Ring of energy resistance, greater Ring of nine lives Ring of friend shield (pair) Ring of protection +5 Ring of shooting stars Ring of spell storing Ring of universal energy resistance, minor Ring of master artifice, greater Ring of wizardry III Ring of telekinesis Ring of regeneration Ring of three wishes Ring of spell turning Ring of wizardry IV Ring of universal energy resistance, major Ring of djinni calling Ring of universal energy resistance, greater Ring of elemental command (air)  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M125 M126 M121 M123 D232 D232 D232 D232 M122 D230 D232 D233 M126 M127 D230 M125 D232 M127 D230 D233 M122 M124 M122 M124 D232 D233 M75 M121 D232 D233 D232 M125 D233 M127  27,000 28,000 30,000 30,000 32,000 36,000 36,000 40,000 40,000 44,000 45,000 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,000 60,000  Gain 1 bonus 5th-level and 6th-level infusion per day Doubles 3rd-level spells per day Telekinesis at will Heal damage quickly over time, regenerate body parts Use wish three times 3/day reflect nine levels of spells as spell turning Doubles 4th-level spells per day Resistance 20 to all types of energy  61,000 70,000 75,000 90,000 97,950 98,280 100,000 120,000  Djinni serves you for up to 1 hour/day Resistance 30 to all types of energy  125,000 180,000  Creates various air-themed effects  200,000  251  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 251  12/21/06 6:03:09 AM  Rings (cont.) Page D231 D231 D231 D233  Item Name Ring of elemental command (earth) Ring of elemental command (fire) Ring of elemental command (water) Ring of spell storing, major  Effect Creates various earth-themed effects Creates various fire-themed effects Creates various water-themed effects Cast up to ten levels of spells stored in the ring  Market Price (gp) 200,000 200,000 200,000 200,000  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Shoulders Page M118 M87 D253 M87 M197 M84 M120 M89 D253 M87 M145 D253 D253 M133  Item Name Piercer cloak Cloak of elemental protection Cloak of resistance +1 Cloak of predatory vigor Standard of valorSP Cape of the viper Rearguard’s cape Cloak of weaponry Cloak of elvenkind Cloak of quills Vanisher cloak Cloak of Charisma +2 Cloak of resistance +2 Scry shroud  M148 M88 M95 M88 M144 M108 D253 M88 M200  White cloak of the spider Cloak of soulbound resistance Dragonscale cloakR Cloak of the salamander Transposer cloak Greater piwafwi Cloak of the manta ray Cloak of stone Mantle of the predatorSP  D253 D252 M89 M212 M115 M148 M88 D252 M112 D253 D253 M147  Cloak of resistance +3 Cape of the mountebank Cloak of turn resistance Veil of doorsSP Mantle of second chances Water cloak Cloak of soulbound resistance, greater Cloak of arachnida Incarnum focus (cloak) Cloak of Charisma +4 Cloak of resistance +4 War wizard cloak  M87 D253 D253 D252 M88 D253 M88 D253 M210 D268 D253 D261 D261  Cloak of battle Cloak of displacement, minor Cloak of resistance +5 Cloak of the bat Cloak of thorns Cloak of Charisma +6 Cloak of the salamander, greater Cloak of displacement, major Phoenix cloak SP Wings of flying Cloak of etherealness Mantle of faith Mantle of spell resistance  Effect Market Price (gp) 3/day attacks made from higher ground deal extra damage 900 1/day resistance 10 against energy type of your choice for 1 round 1,000 +1 resistance bonus on all saving throws 1,000 2/day heal damage equal to your HD while raging 1,400 1/day grant ally extra save against fear effect ( five virtues) 1,400 3 charges/day, transform into a viper for 7 rounds 2,000 1/day +2 to minor and major auras when outnumbered, marshal only 2,000 Store one Medium weapon 2,300 +5 on Hide 2,500 5/day while grappling, deal 1d6 points of damage to grappling opponent 2,500 3 charges/day, you and allies become briefly invisible 2,500 +2 enhancement bonus to Cha 4,000 +2 resistance bonus on all saving throws 4,000 +5 on saves against divinations; if you detect scrying sensor, 4,000 become invisible for 10 rounds +2 on saves against poison; 1/day spider climb, hold person 4,200 +1 on all saving throws; stores up to 2 points of essentia for extra bonuses 5,000 Tiamat: Resistance 5 to energy type of choice plus relic power 5,000 3/day deals 1d6+7 points of fire damage to any creature striking you in melee 6,000 3/day switch positions with another creature within 30 ft. 6,000 Resistance to fire 5; +5 on Hide 6,500 Become a manta ray, as the polymorph spell, upon entering salt water 7,200 +5 on Hide and Move Silently; 1/day meld into stone 8,000 +5 on Hide and Move Silently, +1d6 if target is denied Dex bonus to AC 8,000 (garb of the hunting cat) +3 resistance bonus on all saving throws 9,000 1/day dimension door 10,080 +4 bonus to turn resistance 11,000 Dismiss creature damaged by your summoned creature (seven veils) 11,000 1/day reroll any one roll 12,000 +5 on Reflex against fire effects, various fire-negating abilities 12,000 +1 on all saving throws; stores up to 4 points of essentia for extra bonuses 13,000 Various web and spider-based effects +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying shoulders chakra +4 enhancement bonus to Cha +4 resistance bonus on all saving throws Continuous endure elements, feather fall; 1/day dimension door, mage armor, protection from arrows, sending +4 armor bonus to AC, turns into +1/+1 quarterstaff; 3/day disarm attempt Continuous 20% miss chance +5 resistance bonus on all saving throws +5 on Hide; hang from ceiling, fly, polymorph into a bat at will +2 to natural armor, creatures striking you in melee take 1d4+3 damage +6 enhancement bonus to Cha Deals 1d6+7 points of fire damage to any creature striking you in melee As the displacement spell (50% miss chance), 15 rounds total per day Fly at your land speed with perfect maneuverability (regalia of the phoenix) Fly 60 ft. with good maneuverability, at will As ethereal jaunt for 10 minutes total per day Damage reduction 5/evil Spell resistance 21  14,000 15,000 16,000 16,000 16,000 22,000 24,000 25,000 26,000 26,000 36,000 36,000 50,000 50,000 54,000 55,000 76,000 90,000  Throat Page M131 M85 M70 M68  252  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 252  Item Name Safewing emblem Charm of countersong Amulet of toxin delay Amber amulet of vermin, giant bee  Effect Feather fall up to 180 ft., 1 time Use countersong to interrupt a sonic attack 1/day delay poison for 2 rounds 1/day summons a giant bee to serve you for 1 minute  Market Price (gp) 250 400 400 500  12/21/06 6:03:12 AM  Throat (cont.) Page M68 M85  Effect 1/day breathe water for 5 rounds 1/day reroll one Listen or Spot check  Market Price (gp) 500 500 500 500  1/day move up to half your speed as a swift action  500  1/day reroll one Disable Device check  500  1/day cast one spell of 3rd level or lower with casting time of 1 full round as a standard action 3/day purify food and drink, 1/day align weapon (good) for 1 round Resistance to acid 5 for 1 hour, 6 uses 3/day +2 on Bluff or Diplomacy check 1/day summons a giant praying mantis to serve you for 1 minute  500 500 570 600 700  1/day summons a giant queen ant to serve you for 1 minute  700  1/day summons a Huge monstrous centipede to serve you for 1 minute  700  1/day summons a Huge monstrous scorpion to serve you for 1 minute  700  1/day summons a Large monstrous spider to serve you for 1 minute  700  3 charges/day, bolster yourself and allies against fear if you have aura of courage 1/day summons a giant wasp to serve you for 1 minute  750 800  Mage hand at will 1/day automatically stabilized if at –1 hp or lower 3/day +5 on Str checks made to break or burst an item Grants additional uses of turn or rebuke undead 1/day summons a giant stag beetle to serve you for 1 minute  900 1,000 1,000 1,000 1,200  +2 on Diplomacy, –2 on Bluff; 3/day sanctuary (self only) Unarmed strikes and natural weapon attacks overcome DR as magic weapons 3/day allies gain +2 against charm/fear or +1 to inspire courage (regalia of the hero) Absorb up to 101 points of damage from magic missile 3/day empower specific 1st-level spell  1,350 1,350 1,400 1,500 1,500  Protected by endure elements spell; 3 charges/day, resistance to cold and fire Immediately stand if knocked prone ( five virtues) 3/day various bonuses against aberrations +1 enhancement bonus to natural armor 3/day healed for as much damage as you heal others You and allies gain bonuses; 1/day gain +5 bonus to AC for 1 round 3/day draconic aura effective to 60 ft. for 1 round 3 charges/day, reduces damage from spells and psionic powers 3 charges/day, gain concealment for 1 round 7 charges, immune to one incarnum-draining or soulmeld-unshaping effect +1 on attack rolls against creatures of a specific type, extra bonus for rangers 3 charges/day, gain temporary hit points for 10 minutes Detect golems within 60 ft., overcome golems’ damage reduction 3/day Rary’s telepathic bond with one creature within 1 mile, for 1 minute 3/day empower specific 2nd-level spell  1,500 1,500 1,800 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,000 2,100 2,100 2,300 2,500 3,000 3,000  3/day treat next melee attack as melee touch attack 3/day +4 dodge bonus against attacks of opportunity until end of turn 3 charges/day, grant mount jumping and flying abilities 3/day +5 on Str checks, Str-based skill checks, melee damage rolls for 1 round 2/day deal +1 melee damage/2 levels to evil creature (vestments of divinity) +2 enhancement bonus to Con +2 to flat-footed AC +2 on Diplomacy checks to creatures within 30 ft. (1 power point required) +2 enhancement bonus to Wis  3,000 3,100 3,300 3,300 3,400 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000  APPENDIX 1  1/day reroll one Balance, Climb, or Tumble check 1/day +5 dodge bonus to AC against one ranged attack  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Item Name Amulet of aquatic salvation Chronocharm of the celestial wanderer M85 Chronocharm of the fateweaver M86 Chronocharm of the grand master M86 Chronocharm of the horizon walker M86 Chronocharm of the laughing rogue M86 Chronocharm of the uncaring archmage M139 Symbol of transfiguration M118 Necklace of copper dragon scales M148 Wink brooch M68 Amber amulet of vermin, giant praying mantis M68 Amber amulet of vermin, giant queen ant M68 Amber amulet of vermin, Huge monstrous centipede M68 Amber amulet of vermin, Huge monstrous scorpion M68 Amber amulet of vermin, Large monstrous spider M90 Crest of bravery M68 Amber amulet of vermin, giant wasp D258 Hand of the mage M83 Brooch of stability M96 Eagle claw talisman M120 Reliquary holy symbol M68 Amber amulet of vermin, giant stag beetle M116 Medal of gallantry M148 Wyrmfang amulet M208 Badge of valorSP D250 Brooch of shielding M96 Empowered spellshard, 1st-level spell M97 Enduring amulet M196 Medal of steadfast honorSP M105 Githborn talisman D246 Amulet of natural armor +1 M69 Amulet of retributive healing M70 Amulet of teamwork M95 Dragon spirit amulet M138 Spellsink scarab M143 Torc of displacement M69 Amulet of incarnum shielding M97 Enemy spirit pouch M70 Amulet of tears D266 Golembane scarab M90 Contact medallion M96 Empowered spellshard, 2nd-level spell M110 Heartseeking amulet M82 Brooch of avoidance M120 Reins of ascension M143 Torc of the titans M214 Badge of glorySP D246 Amulet of health +2 M118 Necklace of warning M118 Pendant of joy D263 Periapt of Wisdom +2  253  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 253  12/21/06 6:03:15 AM  Throat (cont.)  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Page M143 M104 M69 M89 M109 M144 M68 D246  Item Name Torc of power preservation Gem of the glitterdepthR Amulet of fortune prevailing Collar of healing Hand of the oak father Vampire torc Amulet of emergency healing Amulet of mighty fists +1  M71 M96  Effect Market Price (gp) 5/day spend 1 less power point than normal when manifesting a power 4,000 Garl Glittergold: +2 enhancement bonus to Wis plus relic powers 4,500 1/day reroll one saving throw 5,000 Know animal’s hit point total; 1/day cure 50 points of damage to animal 5,000 Various druid spell-like abilities 5,000 2/day heal damage equal to half the melee damage you deal 5,000 3/day heal 1d4+5 points of damage, even to creatures under –9 hp 6,000 +1 enhancement bonus on attacks and damage with unarmed attacks 6,000 and natural weapons +2 on Bluff, Diplomacy, Intimidate, Sense Motive; orcs gain +4 and 1/day tongues 6,000 3/day empower specific 3rd-level spell 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,000 6,200 7,400 8,000 8,000 8,000 8,000 8,000 8,000 8,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 11,000 12,000 12,000 13,000 14,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 16,000 16,000 16,000 16,000 18,000 18,000 20,000 24,000  D263 D246 D247  3/day converse with four linked characters for 10 minutes Hold breath 12 hours, 2/day freedom of movement (raiment of the four) 1/day take damage dealt to a single ally with 30 ft. 1/day cure moderate wounds, neutralize poison; extra bonus for paladins Undead have –2 on attacks against you, 1/day death knell, detect undead Immunity to disease +2 enhancement bonus to natural armor +1d6 points of damage with eldritch blasts or chaotic damaging spells 3/day automatically confirm critical threats, but take damage Extra ring slot, 1/day each use daylight and see invisibility DR 10/magic against ranged attacks if you or foe is airborne (array of the manticore) +1 to save DC of powers of a specific psionic discipline Undetectable by the scent ability 3/day gain +4 caster level bonus by sacrificing divine spell or spell slot +1 on all saving throws, +4 on saving throws against disease Immune to harmful vapors and gases, can always breathe 3/day creature attacking you takes damage equal to half what it dealt 7 charges, protects against shape- or composition-changing attacks +2 to Con, 2/day regain sorcerer spell slot (instruments of the blood gift) Detect thoughts, at will Resistance to fire 10; 1/hour immunity to fire until start of next turn Protection from 3 negative levels/day, +2 to AC against undead (wraith’s woe) Darkvision out to 30 ft., +5 on Hide; 1/day blur (self only) +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying throat chakra Automatically stabilizes dying characters, increases natural healing 1/day creates 30-ft. radius of telepathic noise +4 enhancement bonus to Con +4 enhancement bonus to Wis Poison target already affected by your arcane melee touch spell (seven veils) +3 enhancement bonus to natural armor +2d6 points of damage with eldritch blasts or chaotic damaging spells Automatically stabilize; once, if at –10 hp or below, instead stabilize at –1 hp +2 enhancement bonus on attacks and damage with unarmed attacks and natural weapons Immunity to poison +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor Protection as nondetection spell +6 enhancement bonus to Con +6 enhancement bonus to Wis Spell resistance 20, negates various types of attacks twelve times 1/day undo all events of current round and begin turn again 1/day immunity to all damage for 1 round +5 enhancement bonus to natural armor +3 enhancement bonus on attacks and damage with unarmed attacks and natural weapons +10 on Search and Spot, blindsense out to 30 ft. +4 enhancement bonus on attacks and damage with unarmed attacks and natural weapons Plane shift at will, DC 15 Intelligence check to specify ending location +5 enhancement bonus on attacks and damage with unarmed attacks and natural weapons  36,000 36,000 38,000 40,000 40,000 50,000 54,000  Amulet of wordtwisting Empowered spellshard, 3rd-level spell M99 Farspeaking amulet M205 Periapt of the sullen seaSP M143 Torc of heroic sacrifice M144 Unicorn pendant M136 Skull plaque D263 Periapt of health D246 Amulet of natural armor +2 M85 Chasuble of fell power M100 Flesh ring of scorn D258 Hand of glory M195 Medallion of aerial defense SP M119 Psionatrix M132 Scentblinder M71 Ankh of ascension M84 Cat’s-eye brooch D263 Necklace of adaptation M121 Retributive amulet M69 Amulet of inviolate form M203 Blood claw chokerSP D262 Medallion of thoughts M100 Fireflower pendant M216 Choker of life protectionSP M72 Badge of the svirfneblin M112 Incarnum focus (amulet) D264 Periapt of wound closure M68 Amulet of catapsi D246 Amulet of health +4 D263 Periapt of Wisdom +4 M212 Serpent veilSP D246 Amulet of natural armor +3 M85 Chasuble of fell power, greater M132 Scarab of stabilization D246 Amulet of mighty fists +2  D246 D263 D266 M70 M132 D246 D246  Periapt of proof against poison Amulet of natural armor +4 Amulet of proof against detection and location Amulet of health +6 Periapt of Wisdom +6 Scarab of protection Amulet of second chances Scarab of invulnerability Amulet of natural armor +5 Amulet of mighty fists +3  M95 D246  Dragon’s-eye amulet Amulet of mighty fists +4  D247 D246  Amulet of the planes Amulet of mighty fists +5  27,000 32,000 35,000  55,000 96,000 120,000 150,000  254  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 254  12/21/06 6:03:17 AM  Torso Effect Market Price (gp) Mimics five specific outfits 500 Turn undead as if 1 level higher (vestments of divinity) 800 5/day +2 on dispel checks until end of turn 1,000 +1 on saving throws 1,000 3/day +5 on saves against effects generated by undead 2,000 3/day +2 to AC fighting defensively, or using total defense or Combat Expertise 2,000 +5 on Concentration 2,500 Various desert- and thorn-themed effects 3,000 1/day take half critical hit or sneak attack damage 3,200 Expend Stunning Fist or ki power to heal damage equal to monk or ninja level 3,200 +1 to natural armor; 1/day cure serious wounds on another 3,400 +1 to save DC of knight’s challenge 4,000 Deal 4d6 electricity damage to target already damaged by your electricity spell (seven veils) 4,000 +2 on saving throws 4,000 1/day teleport 60 ft. 5,000 Resistance to fire 5; 1/day fire shield and all weapons are flaming 5,000 Lolth: +2 on all saving throws plus relic powers 5,000 +4 on Open Lock, +6 on Escape Artist 5,200 St. Cuthbert: +1 on all saves for you and allies within 20 ft. plus relic powers 5,500 Hide from undead (wraith’s woe) 6,000 Nerull: 1/day become ethereal for 1 round plus relic powers 6,000 3 charges/day, deal electricity damage to attackers for 3 rounds 8,000 Automatically recognize healing spells, 3/day divert healing spells to you 8,000 Damage reduction 3/bludgeoning 9,000 Damage reduction 3/piercing 9,000 Damage reduction 3/slashing 9,000 +3 on saving throws 9,000 Grants one additional use of wild shape per day 10,000 Various evocation-enhancing and metamagic effects 10,000 Damage reduction 3/magic 12,000 3/day freedom of movement effect for 3 rounds ( fleet warrior’s array) 12,000 5/day fly speed of 60 ft. for 5 rounds (array of the manticore) 12,000 +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying heart chakra 15,000 Damage reduction 3/evil 15,000 Damage reduction 3/good 15,000 Damage reduction 3/cold iron 15,000 Damage reduction 3/chaotic 15,000 Damage reduction 3/adamantine 15,000 Damage reduction 3/silver 15,000 Damage reduction 3/lawful 15,000 +4 on all saving throws 16,000 Various rogue-themed bonuses and effects 18,000 +5 on all saving throws 25,000 +5 armor bonus to AC; 1/day blade barrier that lasts for up to 18 min. 34,000 Various powerful defensive, healing, and spellcasting effects 200,000  Item Name Healing belt Belt of one mighty blow Belt of theft-healing Caustic veilSP Dragon spirit cincture Silkslick belt Belt of growth Cord of favorSP Belt of ultimate athleticism Belt of the championR Belt of hidden pouches Belt of priestly might Belt of the wide earthSP Belt of battle Ruby cincture of immutability Spare hand Monk’s belt Belt of dwarvenkind  Effect Market Price (gp) +2 on Heal; 3 charges, heal damage with a touch 750 1/day extra damage on next melee attack before end of turn 1,500 3/day heal damage equal to level of one spell you steal 2,000 Deal 2d6 acid damage to target damaged by your acid spell (seven veils) 2,000 Breath weapon damage increased by 1 die, can increase breath weapon save DC 2,000 Various bonuses on Escape Artist checks 2,000 1/day affected as enlarge person for up to 10 minutes 3,000 +5 on Sense Motive, 3/day divine favor (vestments of divinity) 3,000 Take 10 on various skill checks, 1/day take 20 on one such skill check 3,600 Kord: Functions as belt of giant strength +2 plus relic powers 4,500 Holds items in 30 pockets, which function as small bags of holding 5,000 +1 enhancement bonus to natural armor, +2 enhancement bonus to Strength 6,000 Carrying capacity doubled, 2/day teleport (raiment of the four) 8,000 +2 on initiative; 3 charges/day, perform extra actions 12,000 1/day counter shapechanging and body-altering effects 12,000 Holds items, animates further when powered with infusions 12,000 AC and unarmed damage as monk of five levels higher, extra uses of stunning attack 13,000 Bonuses and penalties on some Cha checks, gain some dwarf racial bonuses 14,900  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Shiftweave Ephod of authoritySP Dispelling cord Vest of resistance +1 Sepulchral vest Vest of defense Tunic of steady spellcasting Burnoose of 1,001 thorns Formless vest Rags of restraint Hair shirt of suffering Surcoat of valor Veil of stormsSP Vest of resistance +2 Bolt shirt Fiery tunic Vestments of ebonsilkR Vest of escape Tabard of the great crusade R Shirt of wraith stalkingSP Tabard of the disembodiedR Lightning tunic Shirt of the leech Shirt of bone Shirt of chains Shirt of the treant Vest of resistance +3 Druid’s vestment Vest of the master evoker Shirt of resilience Vest of free movement SP Winged vest SP Incarnum focus (vestments) Shirt of angels Shirt of demonskin Shirt of the fey Shirt of the inevitable Shirt of ironskin Shirt of the moon Shirt of slaadskin Vest of resistance +4 Rogue’s vest Vest of resistance +5 Impervious vestment Vest of the archmagi  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M133 M215 M94 M147 M133 M146 M144 M83 M100 M119 M109 M139 M213 M147 M75 M99 M147 D268 M140 M216 M140 M114 M135 M134 M134 M136 M147 D268 M146 M135 M198 M195 M112 M134 M134 M134 M134 M135 M135 M135 M147 M130 M147 M112 M145  Waist Page M110 M74 M74 M212 M95 M136 M73 M215 M75 M73 M74 M74 M204 M73 M131 M137 D248 D248  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 255  255  12/21/06 6:03:19 AM  Waist (cont.) Page M93 M112 D248 M109 D248  Item Name Desperation chain Incarnum focus (belt) Belt of giant strength +4 Gwaeron’s belt Belt of giant strength +6  Effect 1/day cast one arcane spell of 3rd level or lower when you are helpless +1 to essentia capacity of soulmelds occupying waist chakra +4 enhancement bonus to Str 1/day weapon is flaming for 12 rounds, 1/day wind walk +6 enhancement bonus to Str  Market Price (gp) 15,000 15,000 16,000 21,000 36,000  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Tools  256  Page M152 D237 D237 P251 P215 P226 P226 P249 P250 P266 P271 P278 D264 M185 D268 P205 M156 D255 D237 D268 M160 D264 M185 M188 D255 D255 D255 D255 D256 M162 M162 D266 M153 M159 P203 P203 P206 P207 P208 P216 P216 P217 P225 P233 P245 P272 P248 P259 P271 P272 P278 P283 D264 M186 M160 D237 D245  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 256  Item Name Blessed bandage Scroll, 0-level spell Scroll, 1st-level spell Oil of magic weapon Potion of cure light wounds Potion of endure elements Potion of enlarge person Potion of mage armor Potion of magic fang Potion of protection from chaos/evil/good/law Potion of remove fear Potion of shield of faith +2 Quaal’s feather token, anchor Skill shard Universal solvent Oil of bless weapon Daylight pellet Elixir of love Scroll, 2nd-level spell Unguent of timelessness Everfull mug Quaal’s feather token, fan Skill shard, greater Tanglepatch Dust of tracelessness Elixir of hiding Elixir of sneaking Elixir of swimming Elixir of vision Incense of concentration Jumping caltrops Silversheen Blight stone Elixir of flaming fists Potion of barkskin +2 Potion of bear’s endurance Potion of blur Potion of bull’s strength Potion of cat’s grace Potion of cure moderate wounds Potion of darkvision Potion of delay poison Potion of eagle’s splendor Potion of fox’s cunning Potion or oil of invisibility Potion of lesser restoration Potion or oil of levitate Potion of owl’s wisdom Potion of remove paralysis Potion of resist energy 10 Potion of shield of faith +3 Potion of spider climb Quaal’s feather token, bird Stench stone Everlasting rations Scroll, 3rd-level spell Wand, 0-level spell  Effect Market Price (gp) Immediately stabilizes target 10 Use a particular 0-level spell, once 12.51 Use a particular 1st-level spell, once 251 Weapon gains +1 enhancement bonus 50 Heal 1d8+1 points of damage 50 Exist comfortably in extreme environments 50 Double in size 50 +4 armor bonus to AC 50 Natural weapon gains +1 enhancement bonus 50 +2 on saves and to AC, counter mind control, hedge out elementals/outsiders 50 Suppresses fear or gives +4 on saves against fear +2 bonus to AC Render a craft immobile for up to 1 day +2 on next check with a specific skill Dissolves sovereign glue, tanglefoot bags, and kuo-toa adhesive Weapon automatically confirms crits against evil foes, good-aligned Throw to create illumination equivalent to daylight spell for 10 rounds Drinker is charmed with first person seen Use a particular 2nd-level spell, once Once-living material resists passage of time 3/day fill with 12 ounces of water, ale, or wine Provides enough wind to propel one ship for up to 8 hours +5 on next check with a specific skill Throw to create entangle effect for 5 rounds, once Conceals evidence of passage +10 on Hide +10 on Move Silently +10 on Swim +10 on Search Prepare one extra 1st-level spell for the day, once Caltrops move 5 ft./round toward nearest enemy, 5 consecutive rounds per day Gives weapon properties of alchemical silver for 1 hour 5d6 damage to all plants and plant creatures in 10-ft. radius +1d6 points of fire damage with unarmed attacks for 3 minutes +2 enhancement bonus to natural armor +4 enhancement bonus to Con Gain concealment +4 enhancement bonus to Str +4 enhancement bonus to Dex Heal 2d8+3 points of damage Gain darkvision out to 60 ft. Temporarily stop poison from harming you +4 enhancement bonus to Cha +4 enhancement bonus to Int Turn invisible Magical ability penalty is dispelled or 1d4 ability damage is repaired Move up or down at will +4 enhancement bonus to Wis Frees subject from paralysis or slow effect Ignore 10 points of damage per attack from specified energy type +3 bonus to AC Can walk on walls or ceilings Delivers a small written message, as a carrier pigeon Target nauseated, creatures within 10 ft. sickened, once 1/day creates trail rations for one Medium creature Use a particular 3rd-level spell, once Use a particular 0-level spell 50 times  50 50 50 50 50 100 150 150 150 1 150 200 200 200 200 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 250 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 300 350 3751 375  12/21/06 6:03:22 AM  Tools (cont.)  P270 P271 P300 M169 M184 D245 M151 M160 M169 M176 M159 D255 D248 M152 M167 P203 M154 M161 D263 M173 D266 P237 M158 D255 P272 D237 D264 M157 M157 D254  Effect Market Price (gp) +1 to natural armor for 12 hours; melee touch attack w/electricity damage, once 400 +1 point of essentia to your essentia pool for 1 round, once 400 Feather fall for up to four creatures, once 400 Produces a great oak tree 400 Renders hidden creatures visible within 10-ft. radius, once 450 Produces a swan boat with speed 60 ft. on water for up to 1 day 450 2/day use particular 0-level spell 460 Create cloud that gives 50% miss chance to ranged attacks passing through 500 +10 temporary hp, +20 temporary hp if wearing adamantine armor 500 Drinker must say nothing but the truth for 10 minutes 500 Recover 1 extra hp per character level, gain endure elements when sleeping 500 Produces a +1 dancing whip for up to 1 hour 500 3 hours/day create Tenser’s floating disk 500 Grows to 350 ft., up to 12 consecutive hours 500 +3 enhancement bonus to natural armor 600 +4 bonus to AC 600 Ignore 20 points of damage per attack from specified energy type 700 Use a particular 4th-level spell, once 700 1 Throw to affect creatures as divest essentia, once 700 +1 enhancement bonus to weapon, or up to 50 projectiles 750 Normal weapon’s threat range is doubled 750 +1 enhancement bonus to armor or shield 750 Heal 3d8+5 hit points of damage 750 Gain total concealment 750 Fly speed of 60 ft. 750 Become insubstantial and fly slowly 750 +1 enhancement bonus to one or all natural weapons 750 Move faster, +1 on attack rolls, AC, and Reflex saves 750 +2 on attack rolls, saves, skill checks 750 +2 on saves and to AC, counter mind control, hedge out elementals/outsiders 750 Immunity to poison, venom in or on you neutralized Absorb 36 points of damage from one kind of energy Cure normal or magical blindness or deafness  APPENDIX 1  P257 P266 P270  Item Name Electric eel elixir Essentia jewel Life ring Quaal’s feather token, tree Glitter stone Quaal’s feather token, swan boat Eternal wand, 0-level spell Dust of dispersion Elixir of adamantine blood Elixir of truth Magic bedroll Quaal’s feather token, whip Talisman of the disk Troll gut rope Potion of barkskin +3 Potion of shield of faith +4 Potion of resist energy 20 Scroll, 4th-level spell Soulvoid orb Oil of greater magic weapon +1 Oil of keen edge Oil of magic vestment +1 Potion of cure serious wounds Potion of displacement Potion of fly Potion of gaseous form Potion of greater magic fang +1 Potion of haste Potion of heroism Potion of magic circle against chaos/evil/good/law Potion of neutralize poison Potion of protection from energy Potion of remove blindness/deafness Potion of remove curse Potion of remove disease Potion of water breathing Powder of the black veil Scrying beacon Wand, 1st-level spell Bag of endless caltrops Everlasting feedbag Porcupine elixir Rope of stone Eternal wand, 1st-level spell Dust of dryness Bag of tricks, gray Blast disk Pearl of brain lock Potion of barkskin +4 Cognizance crystal, 1 point Glyph seal Pearl of power, 1st-level spell Replenishing skin Salve of slipperiness Potion of good hope Drums of marching Elixir of fire breath Potion of resist energy 30 Scroll, 5th-level spell Pipes of the sewers Dragon’s draught, brass Dragon’s draught, white Dust of illusion  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page M158 M159 M163 D264 M161 D264 M159 M158 M158 D256 M163 D264 M188 M190 P203 P278 P272 D237 M186 P251 P246 P251 P216 P223 P232 P234 P250 P239 P240 P249  750 750 750  Frees you from curse 750 Cures you of all diseases 750 Breathe underwater 750 Creates cloud with blinding effect, once 750 Choose to center next clairaudience/clairvoyance spell on the beacon 750 Use a particular 1st-level spell 50 times 750 5/day create caltrops to cover a 5-ft. square 800 1/day create feed for one horse 800 +1 to natural armor, deal 1d6 piercing damage with grapple attacks, 12 hours 800 Rope becomes as hard as stone on command 800 2/day use particular 1st-level spell 820 Destroys 100 gallons of water, destroys water elementals 850 10/week creates one random animal that serves for 10 minutes 900 Effective as proximity or timed mine that deals fire damage 900 Throw to daze creature for 3 rounds, once 900 +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor 900 Stores 1 power point 1,000 Convert a spell of up to 2nd level into a glyph of warding effect, once 1,000 1/day regain one 1st-level spell already cast 1,000 Slowly refills with water when empty 1,000 +20 on Escape Artist for 8 hours 1,000 +2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks 1,050 You and allies gain +4 on Con checks to avoid nonlethal damage from forced march 1,100 Gain ability to breathe fire three times 1,100 Ignore 30 points of damage per attack from specified energy type 1,100 Use a particular 5th-level spell, once 1,1251 Attract 1d3 rat swarms 1,150 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 60-ft. line, 6d6 fire damage 1,200 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 30-ft. cone, 6d6 cold damage 1,200 Affect creature as disguise self for 2 hours 1,200  257  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 257  12/21/06 6:03:25 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Tools (cont.) Page P251 P251 P203 P250 M151 M161 M183 M184 M150 M150 M158 M174 M175 M184 M186 M150 M153 M160 M161 M164 M190 M173 D263 D237 D255 P251 P251 D264 P250 D265 M186 M160 D259 D259 M167 M168 M174 M176 M185 M163 D255 M162 P251 D237 M174 M157 M157 P251 P251 P250 D266 D248 D251 M153 M155 M162 M165 D263 D267 M149 M162 D248  Item Name Oil of greater magic weapon +2 Oil of magic vestment +2 Potion of barkskin +5 Potion of greater magic fang +2 Beetle elixir Fochlucan bandore Salve of minor spell resistance Scrying shard Arcane thieves’ tools Bag of boulders Ehlonna’s seed pouchR Rod of frost Rod of sliding Sending stones (pair) Spool of endless rope Aroma of dreams Camouflage paint Exploding spike Hammersphere Memento magica, 1st-level spell Tome of worldly memory Rhino elixir Necklace of fireballs type I Scroll, 6th-level spell Dust of appearance Oil of greater magic weapon +3 Oil of magic vestment +3 Pipes of sounding Potion of greater magic fang +3 Quiver of Ehlonna Sphere of awakening Field provisions box Heward’s handy haversack Horn of fog Orb of environmental adaptation Pearl of breath crisis Rod of grievous wounds Rod of viscid globs Slashing sand Mac-Fuirmidh cithern Elemental gem Healing salve Wand of magic missile Scroll, 7th-level spell Rod of fumbling Dragon’s draught, black Dragon’s draught, copper Oil of greater magic weapon +4 Oil of magic vestment +4 Potion of greater magic fang +4 Sovereign glue Bag of holding type I Candle of truth Censer of the last breathR Crystal anchor of alertness Icy strand of the north Metamagic rod, Substitution, lesser Necklace of fireballs type II Stone of alarm Aberrant sphere Infinite scrollcase Bag of tricks, rust  Effect Market Price (gp) +2 enhancement bonus to weapon or up to 50 projectiles 1,200 +2 enhancement bonus to armor or shield 1,200 +5 enhancement bonus to natural armor 1,200 +2 enhancement bonus to one or all natural weapons 1,200 Darkvision out to 60 ft. and +2 to natural armor, 12 hours 1,350 +2 on Perform (string instruments); use spell-like abilities if 2 ranks in Perform 1,350 Spell resistance 17 for 5 minutes 1,350 May use as a focus for scrying 1,350 Sacrifice arcane spell for +5 on next Disable Device or Open Lock check 1,400 3 charges/day, create thrown rocks that deal bludgeoning damage 1,400 Ehlonna: Produces three goodberries per day plus relic powers 1,400 3/day creates a 30-foot line of frost for a variety of effects 1,400 3/day push or pull one targeted creature 5 ft. 1,400 1/day send a message as sending to bearer of other stone 1,400 Create up to 500 ft. of silk rope 1,400 Put nearby creatures to sleep 1,500 5 applications, +5 on Hide when stationary for 2 hours 1,500 Effective land mine deals fire damage, invisible 1 round after planted 1,500 1/day conjure giant spiritual hammer that deals 3d6 points of damage 1,500 1/day regain a previously used 1st-level spell slot 1,500 3/day +5 on single Knowledge check 1,500 +3 to natural armor and +1 on melee damage rolls, 12 hours 1,600 Hurl up to three fireballs of various strengths 1,650 Use a particular 6th-level spell, once 1,650 1 Reveals objects as they are, negates invisibility 1,800 +3 enhancement bonus to weapon or up to 50 projectiles 1,800 +3 enhancement bonus to armor or shield 1,800 Ghost sound at will 1,800 +3 enhancement bonus to one or all natural weapons 1,800 Stores up to eighty-four objects of various sizes 1,800 1/day allies within 60 ft. awakened from sleep, immune to tiring effects 1,800 1/day produces full day’s sustenance for up to fifteen humans or five horses 2,000 Holds up to 120 lb., but weighs only 5 lb.; all objects stored are easily accessible 2,000 Creates 10 square ft. of fog similar to obscuring mist 2,000 Exist comfortably in conditions between –50°F and 140°F 2,000 for 7 consecutive days For 5 rounds, target must spend standard action or suffocate, once 2,000 5/day 1d8+5 damage to each injured adjacent creature 2,000 3/day fire globs with tanglefoot bag effect 2,000 Creates equivalent of spike stones spell, once 2,000 +2 on Perform (string instruments); use spell-like abilities if 4 ranks in Perform 2,100 Summon Large elemental as summon nature’s ally 2,250 Heals various amounts of damage, 10 applications 2,250 Use magic missile (CL 3rd) 50 times 2,250 Use a particular 7th-level spell, once 2,2751 2/day creature within 30 ft. drops all items it holds 2,300 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 80-ft. line, 12d4 acid damage 2,400 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 80-ft. line, 12d4 acid damage 2,400 +4 enhancement bonus to weapon or up to 50 projectiles 2,400 +4 enhancement bonus to armor or shield 2,400 +4 enhancement bonus to one or all natural weapons 2,400 Binds any two substances together permanently 2,400 Holds up to 250 lb. or 30 cu. ft., but weighs only 15 lb. 2,500 Creates zone of truth spell in 5-ft. radius for 1 hour 2,500 Nerull: Obscuring mist effect plus relic powers 2,500 Area is lit, +5 on Listen and Spot for you and allies within 30 ft. 2,500 Hurl up to six cold missiles of various strengths 2,500 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Energy Substitution 2,700 Hurl up to five fireballs of various strengths Sets an alarm on any object, screeches for 1 hour if alarm is tripped 3 charges/day, summons aberrations but you take a penalty on Will saves Holds up to 50 scrolls, +4 on Concentration checks to cast defensively 10/week creates one random animal that serves for 10 minutes  2,700 2,700 2,800 2,800 3,000  258  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 258  12/21/06 6:03:27 AM  Tools (cont.) Effect Market Price (gp) Explodes when thrown, then acts as Otiluke’s resilient sphere 3,000 10 charges, looses or opens locks, doors, lids, and so on 3,000 +30-ft. enhancement bonus to animal’s speed 3,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Enlarge Spell 3,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Extend Spell 3,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Sculpt Spell 3,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Silent Spell 3,000 +5 enhancement bonus to weapon or up to 50 projectiles 3,000 +5 enhancement bonus to armor or shield 3,000 +5 enhancement bonus to one or all natural weapons 3,000 Can be commanded to uncoil in any direction, can fasten or knot itself 3,000 Use a particular 8th-level spell, once 3,000 1 3 charges/day, gain bonus to turning level 3,000 Expend bardic music use to deal 3d6+Cha modifier of sonic damage 3,100 3 charges/day, heal Int, Wis, or Cha damage 3,100 Olidammara: +5 on Perform (wind instruments) plus relic powers 3,100 3 charges/day, heal Str, Dex, and Con damage 3,100 Can instantaneously cast one spell on single animal you summon 3,100 Gain access to specific cleric domain for 24 hours 3,300 5/day create various useful survival items 3,300 3 charges/day, create various fire-based effects 3,500 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 100-ft. line, 12d6 electricity damage 3,500 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 50-ft. cone, 12d6 acid damage 3,500 Greater invisibility for 2d6 rounds 3,500 Sheds bright light; 3 charges/day, deals damage to undead 3,500 2/day each, jump, knock; 1/day create water-repelling spherical ward 3,500 Pelor: Continuous heightened daylight plus relic powers 3,500 Effective land mine with sleep effect, invisible 1 round after planted 3,500 Kurtulmak: Acts as portable hole, but 50 ft. deep plus relic powers 3,600 2/day make gaze attack with suggestion effect on one creature 3,600 Use magic missile (CL 5th) 50 times 3,750 Becomes a raven as affected by animal messenger, 24 total hours/week 3,800 Use a particular 9th-level spell, once Stores up to 3 power points Convert a spell of up to 5th level into a greater glyph of warding effect, once Sustains you without food or water Acts as neutralize poison, remove disease, or cure light wounds Create mundane objects by painting their images 1/day regain one 2nd-level spell already cast +4 on saves against sonic effects;1/day silence (centered on you), shout 3/day allies adjacent to you gain +5 bonus on next attack roll Acts as stone to flesh or stoneskin Item can be used normally in wild shape +2 on Perform (string instruments); use spell-like abilities if 6 ranks in Perform Hurl up to seven fireballs of various strengths Hurl up to seven electricity coils of various strengths 3/day bless weapon for 10 rounds 5 charges/day, create various plant-based effects 2/day use particular 2nd-level spell Kill nearby creatures with low Hit Dice Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 100-ft. line, 12d8 electricity damage Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 50-ft. cone, 12d8 cold damage Use a particular 2nd-level spell 50 times 1/day create small tent and one day’s sustenance Prepare all spells as if affected by Maximize Spell feat, at their normal level Holds up to 500 lb. or 70 cu. ft., but weighs only 25 lb. 3/day gain DR 2/adamantine, DR 3/adamantine, or DR 4/adamantine 2/day gain various protection effects to you or allies (regalia of the hero) Stays in place, even in midair +1 insight bonus to AC 3 charges/day, various knight- and paladin-themed bonuses and effects 3/day create blinding effect for 1 round Creates shallow, extradimensional pit Yondalla: +5 on Knowledge (geography) and Survival plus relic powers  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Bead of force Chime of opening Horseshoes of speed Metamagic rod, Enlarge, lesser Metamagic rod, Extend, lesser Metamagic rod, Sculpting, lesser Metamagic rod, Silent, lesser Oil of greater magic weapon +5 Oil of magic vestment +5 Potion of greater magic fang +5 Rope of climbing Scroll, 8th-level spell Talisman of undead mastery Chime of harmonic agony Orb of mental renewal Pipes of frenzied revelryR Rod of bodily restoration Summoner’s totem Domain draught Survival pouch Bag of flames Dragon’s draught, bronze Dragon’s draught, green Dust of disappearance Radiant sphere Rod of escape Shard of the sunR Sleeping spike Enveloping pitR Mirror of suggestion Wand of magic missile Figurine of wondrous power, silver raven D237 Scroll, 9th-level spell M154 Cognizance crystal, 3 points M161 Glyph seal, greater D260 Ioun stone, clear spindle D261 Keoghtom’s ointment D263 Nolzur’s marvelous pigments D263 Pearl of power, 2nd-level spell M175 Rod of silence M175 Rod of sure striking D267 Stone salve M190 Wilding clasp M156 Doss lute D263 Necklace of fireballs type III M187 Strand of lightning M183 Sacred scabbard M188 Thorn pouch M159 Eternal wand, 2nd-level spell M150 Aroma of curdled death M157 Dragon’s draught, blue M157 Dragon’s draught, silver D245 Wand, 2nd-level spell M168 Personal oasis D260 Incense of meditation D248 Bag of holding type II M156 Diamondskin decanter M208 Horn of resilience SP D235 Immovable rod D260 Ioun stone, dusty rose prism M166 Noble pennon M167 Orb of blinding M169 Portable foxhole M164 Map of unseen landsR  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page D248 D252 D260 D236 D236 M165 D236 P251 P251 P250 D266 D237 M188 M154 M167 M168 M173 M187 M156 M187 M151 M157 M157 D255 M172 M173 M185 M185 M159 M165 P251 D256  3,8251 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,000 4,100 4,350 4,350 4,400 4,400 4,420 4,500 4,500 4,500 4,500 4,600 4,900 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,000 5,200  259  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 259  12/21/06 6:03:30 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Tools (cont.) Page P251 D256 D262 D263 M157 M157 M176 M189 D268 D263 M155 M155 M161 D260 M164 D264 M169 M170 M170 M175 M184 D248 D259 D266 P251 M190 D249 D250 D248 D258 M189 M152 D258 D260 D260 D260 D260 D260 D260 M177 M183 M188 M153 D254 D263 D251 M180 D263 M151 M154 M155 D254 D236 M165 M165 D263 M183 M187 D256 D267 D248  Item Name Wand of magic missile Eversmoking bottle Murlynd’s spoon Necklace of fireballs type IV Dragon’s draught, gold Dragon’s draught, red Rope of climbing, superior Tome of ancient loreR Wind fan Necklace of fireballs type V Conduit rod Cornucopia of the needfulR Globe of sunlight Horseshoes of a zephyr Memento magica, 2nd-level spell Pipes of haunting Psychoactive skin of the celestial Psychoactive skin of ectoplasmic armor Psychoactive skin of the fiend Rod of transposition Shackles of silence Bag of tricks, tan Horn of goodness/evil Shrouds of disintegration Wand of magic missile Tomebound eye of Boccob Folding boat Bottle of air Bag of holding type III Harp of charming Tome of the stilled tongueR Blast globes Golem manual, flesh Ioun stone, deep red sphere Ioun stone, incandescent blue sphere Ioun stone, pale blue rhomboid Ioun stone, pink and green sphere Ioun stone, pink rhomboid Ioun stone, scarlet and blue sphere Runestaff of charming Scrolls of uncertain provenanceR Talisman of undying fortitude Canaith mandolin Deck of illusions Necklace of fireballs type VI Candle of invocation Runestaff of fire Necklace of fireballs type VII Battle bridle Cognizance crystal, 5 points Daern’s instant tent Decanter of endless water Metamagic rod, Empower, lesser Metamagic rod, Reach, lesser Mirror of time hop Pearl of power, 3rd-level spell Scepter of the netherworld Stunning spike Figurine of wondrous power, serpentine owl Strand of prayer beads, lesser Bag of holding type IV  Effect Market Price (gp) Use magic missile (CL 7th) 50 times 5,250 Covers up to 100-ft. radius in smoke 5,400 Creates enough gruel to sustain up to four humans 5,400 Hurl up to nine fireballs of various strengths 5,400 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 50-ft. cone, 12d10 fire damage 5,500 Dragons/dragonblood gain breath weapon: 50-ft. cone, 12d10 fire damage 5,500 As rope of climbing, and +5 on Climb to ascend this rope 5,500 Boccob: +5 on Knowledge (arcana) and Spellcraft plus relic powers 5,500 1/day (or more) gust of wind 5,500 Hurl up to seven fireballs of various strengths 5,850 3/day you and adjacent creatures gain +20 to energy resistance of choice for 1 round 6,000 Yondalla: Create fruit with healing and protective effects plus relic powers 6,000 Throw to create effect as a sunburst spell, but with 40-ft. radius, once 6,000 Animal travels without touching the ground 6,000 1/day regain a previously used 2nd-level spell slot 6,000 2/day creatures with 5 or fewer HD become frightened 6,000 Gain various celestial benefits, 7 rounds/day 6,000 +8 armor bonus to AC, max Dex +2, –6 armor check, 25% arcane spell failure 6,000 Gain various fiendish bonuses, 7 rounds/day 3/day exchange positions with another creature within 30 ft. Silence shackled creature, escape triggers alarm 10/week creates one random animal that serves for 10 minutes 1/day magic circle against evil or good (depends on your alignment) for 1 hour Turn corpse to dust Use magic missile (CL 9th) 50 times 3 charges/day, gain bonus on caster level checks to overcome spell resistance Becomes a boat or ship on command Continually retains and replenishes fresh air Holds up to 1,000 lb. or 150 cu. ft., but weighs only 35 lb. Suggestion once per 10 minutes with successful DC 14 Perform check Vecna: Information on becoming a lich, 500 blank spell pages plus relic powers 1/day use as ranged explosives, dealing fire and sonic damage with other effects Contains information and spells necessary to create a flesh golem +2 enhancement bonus to Dex +2 enhancement bonus to Wis  6,000 6,000 6,000 6,300 6,500 6,600 6,750 7,000 7,200 7,250 7,400 7,500 7,500 8,000 8,000 8,000 8,000  +2 enhancement bonus to Str +2 enhancement bonus to Cha +2 enhancement bonus to Con +2 enhancement bonus to Int  8,000 8,000 8,000 8,000  Create various charm effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Wee Jas: +5 on Knowledge plus relic powers 2/day take on some undead qualities for 3 rounds +2 on Perform (string instruments); use spell-like abilities if 8 ranks in Perform Creates a major image of a random creature Hurl up to nine fireballs of various strengths Various morale and spellcasting effects for characters of a given alignment Create various fire effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Hurl up to nine fireballs of various strengths Rider gets +5 on Ride and benefit of Mounted Combat feat, mount only Stores up to 5 power points Grows into tent large enough to accommodate eight Medium creatures Creates various amounts of water, on command 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Empower Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Reach Spell 2/day make gaze attack to push one creature 5 rounds forward in time 1/day regain one 3rd-level spell already cast Turn or rebuke undead as if 3 levels higher Effective land mine stuns creatures within 20 ft., invisible 1 round after planted 1/day becomes a normal-sized horned owl or giant owl for 8 hours  8,000 8,000 8,000 8,100 8,100 8,100 8,400 8,400 8,700 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,000 9,100  Creates various divine spell effects Holds up to 1,500 lb. or 250 cu. ft., but weighs only 60 lb.  9,600 10,000  260  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 260  12/21/06 6:03:32 AM  Tools (cont.) Page D256 D256 D260 M171  D244 D252 D250 D256  Market Price (gp) 10,000  3/week becomes a rideable, pony-sized fly for 12 hours  10,000  Alertness as the feat 3/day numeric spell and power effects targeting you are minimized for 1 round  10,000 10,000  Boccob: Reflect the next 3 spell levels targeted on you plus relic powers Control twice as many HD of undead as normal Create various stealth-themed effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 5/day creatures adjacent to you are held in place for 1 round Becomes tireless heavy horse, on command 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Energy Substitution Find metal or minerals within 30 feet Hurl up to seven acidic missiles of various strengths 2/day use particular 3rd-level spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Enlarge Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Extend Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Sculpt Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Silent Spell Drains one item of all magical properties Create various vision effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Use a particular 3rd-level spell 50 times 2/day summon apparitions that deal 3d6 damage to living creature for 4 rounds Contains information and spells necessary to create a clay golem 1/day heroes’ feast for twelve participants Creatures are fascinated, then damaged and shaken after playing stops Gain two primary natural claw attacks, psychic warriors only Create random effects Create various imprisonment effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create various size altering effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Bardic music grants allies within 60 ft. fast healing 3 for 1 minute Scribe spells without paying material cost 50 charges, produces various degrees of illumination, some blinding 1/day negates attacks on buildings; 1/week magically construct edifices 1/day regain a previously used 3rd-level spell slot Use searing light (CL 6th) 50 times 3/day 30-ft. cone of acid that deals 9d6 acid damage 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Chain Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Maximize Spell Create various darkness effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Becomes tireless heavy warhorse, on command Suppresses fear effects, prevents confused and stunned conditions within 20 ft. +10 on Tumble +10 on Hide Arrows and bolts stored within deal +1d6 energy damage Extinguish magical and nonmagical fires Create various opening effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 3/day each, entangling silk strands and poison touch attacks Creates various sea- and water-based effects Breathe and act underwater without hindrance, 60-ft. swim speed 1/week becomes an intelligent, perceptive riding dog for up to 6 hours  10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,000 10,500 10,500 10,700 10,900 11,000 11,000 11,000 11,000 11,000 11,000 11,250 12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000 12,000 12,100 12,500 13,000 13,000 13,500 13,500 14,000 14,000 14,000 14,000 14,800 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,000 15,100 15,300 15,500  Stores up to 7 power points 1/day regain one 4th-level spell already cast Create various undead-creation effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create various sight effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 3/day keen edge, can accommodate any knife, dagger, or sword 1/day figurines become two normal lions for up to 1 hour  16,000 16,000 16,000 16,000 16,000 16,500  Create various charm effects Once/10 minutes, spells with verbal components require Concentration checks Fly as overland flight spell for up to 9 hours/day, comes when called 4/month becomes elephant for up to 24 hours  16,500 16,800 17,000 17,000  APPENDIX 1  M154 D263 M182 M182 D266 D256  Effect 2/week becomes a griffon for 6 hours  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  M174 M175 M177 M185 D267 M165 D236 M187 M159 D236 D236 M165 D236 D234 M178 D245 M160 D258 M162 D264 M170 D237 M178 M181 M156 D249 D257 D261 M164 P275 M162 M165 D236 M181 D267 M151 M171 M170 M172 D235 M181 M186 D260 D263 D256  Item Name Figurine of wondrous power, bronze griffon Figurine of wondrous power, ebony fly Ioun stone, dark blue rhomboid Psychoactive skin of power damping Rod of reversalR Rod of undead mastery Runestaff of the assassin Soul anchor Stone horse, courser Metamagic rod, Substitution Rod of metal and mineral detection Strand of acid pearls Eternal wand, 3rd-level spell Metamagic rod, Enlarge Metamagic rod, Extend Metamagic rod, Sculpting Metamagic rod, Silent Rod of cancellation Runestaff of eyes Wand, 3rd-level spell Flesheater Golem manual, clay Horn of plenty Pipes of pain Psychoactive skin of the claw Rod of wonder Runestaff of entrapment Runestaff of size alteration Dove’s harp Boccob’s blessed book Gem of brightness Lyre of building Memento magica, 3rd-level spell Wand of searing light Harrow rod Metamagic rod, Chaining, lesser Metamagic rod, Maximize, lesser Runestaff of night Stone horse, destrier Banner of the storm’s eye Psychoactive skin of nimbleness Psychoactive skin of the chameleon Quiver of energy Rod of flame extinguishing Runestaff of opening Spider rod Horn of the tritons Pearl of the sirines Figurine of wondrous power, onyx dog Cognizance crystal, 7 points Pearl of power, 4th-level spell Runestaff of the undying Runestaff of vision Scabbard of keen edges Figurine of wondrous power, golden lions Staff of charming Chime of interruption Broom of flying Figurine of wondrous power, marble elephant  261  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 261  12/21/06 6:03:35 AM  Tools (cont.)  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Page M157 D260 M180 M154 M180 M182 D252 D259 D260 D260 M163 D264 M180 D267 D256 D266 M177 D245 D258 P223 P231 P248 P275 M176 D235 M164 M170 M170 M178 M165 D236 D236 M165 D236 D245 M154 M164 D263 D236 M177 M178 M182 D261 M177 D253 M177 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D244 D255 D256 D244 D245  Item Name Dragondoom scepter Ioun stone, iridescent spindle Runestaff of forced happiness Cli lyre Runestaff of illusion Runestaff of transportation Carpet of flying, 5 ft. by 5 ft. Horn of blasting Ioun stone, pale lavender ellipsoid Ioun stone, pearly white spindle Lens of the desert Portable hole Runestaff of frost Stone of good luck Figurine of wondrous power, ivory goats Rope of entanglement Runestaff of divination Wand, 4th-level spell Golem manual, stone Wand of dispel magic Wand of fireball Wand of lightning bolt Wand of searing light Runestaff of the artisan Rod of enemy detection Memento magica, 4th-level spell Psychoactive skin of celestial embrace Psychoactive skin of fiendish embrace Runestaff of earth and stone Metamagic rod, Substitution, greater Metamagic rod, Enlarge, greater Metamagic rod, Extend, greater Metamagic rod, Sculpting, greater Metamagic rod, Silent, greater Staff of swarming insects Cognizance crystal, 9 points Magic siphon Pearl of power, 5th-level spell Rod of splendor Runestaff of conjuration Runestaff of evocation Runestaff of transmutation Iron bands of Bilarro Runestaff of cacophony Cube of frost resistance Runestaff of destruction Manual of bodily health +1 Manual of gainful exercise +1 Manual of quickness in action +1 Tome of clear thought +1 Tome of leadership and influence +1 Tome of understanding +1 Staff of healing Dimensional shackles Figurine of wondrous power, obsidian steed Staff of fire Staff of size alteration  Effect Market Price (gp) Various spellcasting benefits against creatures of the dragon type 18,000 Sustains you without air 18,000 Create various forced celebration effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 18,000 +2 on Perform (string instruments); use spell-like abilities if 10 ranks in Perform 18,100 Create various illusion effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 19,000 Create various transportation effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 19,000 Flies as if affected by overland flight; fly speed 40 ft., capacity 200 lb. 20,000 1/day (or more) deals sonic damage and deafens creatures 20,000 Absorbs spells of 4th level or lower, 20 total spell levels maximum 20,000 Regenerate 1 point of damage per hour 3/day sunbeam Extradimensional storage space with 6 ft. diameter and 10 ft. deep Create various cold effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots +1 on saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks Figurines become three goats, each with different traits  20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 20,000 21,000  Entangles a creature on command Create various divination effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Use a particular 4th-level spell 50 times Contains information and spells necessary to create a stone golem Use dispel magic (CL 10th) 50 times Use fireball (CL 10th) 50 times Use lightning bolt (CL 10th) 50 times Use searing light (CL 10th) 50 times Create various fabrication effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 3/day identify all hostile creatures within 60 ft. 1/day regain a previously used 4th-level spell slot Gain powerful, celestial benefits 15 rounds/day  21,000 21,000 21,000 22,000 22,500 22,500 22,500 22,500 23,000 23,500 24,000 24,000  Gain powerful fiendish bonuses, 15 rounds/day  24,000  Create various earth and transportation effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Energy Substitution  24,000  3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Enlarge Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Extend Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Sculpt Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Silent Spell Create various insect swarm effects Stores up to 9 power points 1/day creatures adjacent to you affected by targeted greater dispel magic 1/day regain one 5th-level spell already cast +4 enhancement bonus to Cha, creates fine clothes and palatial pavilion Create various conjuration effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create various evocation effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create various transmutation effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 1/day bind Large or smaller creature Create various sonic effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create 10-ft. cube-shaped area that negates cold-based attacks Create various destructive effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots +1 inherent bonus to Con +1 inherent bonus to Str +1 inherent bonus to Dex +1 inherent bonus to Int +1 inherent bonus to Cha  24,500 24,500 24,500 24,500 24,750 25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000 25,000 26,000 26,000 27,000 27,000 27,500 27,500 27,500 27,500 27,500  +1 inherent bonus to Wis Create various healing effects Affects bound creatures as dimensional anchor spell 1/week becomes a heavy warhorse for 24 hours  27,500 27,750 28,000 28,500  Create various fire effects Create various size alteration effects  28,500 29,000  24,300  262  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 262  12/21/06 6:03:37 AM  Tools (cont.)  M170 M176 M178 M180 M150 D236 M165 P285 M180 D252 D258 D236 M182 M154 D260 D263 M190 D236 M182 M164 M181  Psychoactive skin of the defender Runestaff of abjuration Runestaff of enchantment Runestaff of necromancy Anstruth harp Metamagic rod, Empower Metamagic rod, Reach Wand of stoneskin Runestaff of illumination Carpet of flying, 5 ft. by 10 ft. Golem manual, iron Metamagic rod, Quicken, lesser Runestaff of time Cognizance crystal, 11 points Ioun stone, vibrant purple prism Pearl of power, 6th-level spell Truelight lantern Rod of negation Runestaff of the undead slayer Memento magica, 5th-level spell Runestaff of power  D260  Ioun stone, lavender and green ellipsoid Psychoactive skin of iron Psychoactive skin of the spider Ring gates Crystal ball Golem manual, greater stone Strand of prayer beads Runestaff of insanity Orb of storms Runestaff of fiendish darkness Staff of illumination Cognizance crystal, 13 points Pearl of power, 7th-level spell Crystal ball with see invisibility Horn of Valhalla Rod of absorption Ollamh harp Crystal ball with detect thoughts Memento magica, 6th-level spell Metamagic rod, Chaining Metamagic rod, Maximize Daern’s instant fortress Manual of bodily health +2 Manual of gainful exercise +2 Manual of quickness in action +2 Tome of clear thought +2 Tome of leadership and influence +2 Tome of understanding +2 Staff of frost Staff of defense Carpet of flying, 10 ft. by 10 ft. Darkskull  M171 M172 D265 D253 D258 D267 M180 D263 M178 D244 M154 D263 D253 D260 D234 M166 D253 M164 M165 D236 D254 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D244 D244 D252 D254  Effect Market Price (gp) 1/day affect creatures as fear spell 30,000 +1 to caster level 30,000 +1 on attack rolls, saves, skill checks, and ability checks 30,000 Reveals creatures and objects as invisibility purge 30,000 Create various construction effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 30,000 +1/masterwork quarterstaff, create various ethereal effects by expending 31,300 arcane spells or spell slots +4 to natural armor 32,000 Create various abjuration effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 32,000 Create various enchantment effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 32,000 Create various necromancy effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 32,000 +2 on Perform (string instruments), use spell-like abilities if 12 ranks in Perform 32,100 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Empower Spell 32,500 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Reach Spell 32,500 Use stoneskin 50 times 33,500 Create various light effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 34,500 Flies as if affected by overland flight; fly speed 40 ft., capacity 400 lb. 35,000 Contains information and spells necessary to create an iron golem 35,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 3rd level as though affected by Quicken Spell 35,000 Create various time effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 35,000 Stores up to 11 power points 36,000 Stores three levels of spells, as a ring of spell storing 36,000 1/day regain one 6th-level spell already cast 36,000 Continual flame, can form cone of light 1/day true seeing effect for 10 minutes 36,000 3/day negate spell-like functions of a magic item 37,000 Create various undead-slaying effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 37,000 1/day regain a previously used 5th-level spell slot 37,500 +2/masterwork quarterstaff, create various powerful effects by expending 38,300 arcane spells or spell slots, smite Absorbs spells of 8th level or lower, 50 times 40,000 1/day iron body, 15 minutes/day +10 on Climb, various spider-themed bonuses and effects Transfer up to 100 lb. of material per day up to 100 miles between gates Scrying at will Contains information and spells necessary to create a greater stone golem Creates various divine spells effects Create various madness effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create various weather effects Create various darkness and other effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots Create various light effects Stores up to 13 power points 1/day regain one 7th-level spell already cast Scrying at will, can use invisibility at will through crystal ball Summons construct barbarians to fight opponents Negate up to 50 spell levels, store them for later use +2 on Perform (string instruments); use spell-like abilities if 14 ranks in Perform Scrying at will, can use detect thoughts at will through crystal ball 1/day regain a previously used 6th-level spell slot 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Chain Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Maximize Spell Becomes adamantine fortress on command +2 inherent bonus to Con +2 inherent bonus to Str +2 inherent bonus to Dex +2 inherent bonus to Int +2 inherent bonus to Cha  40,000 40,000 40,000 42,000 44,000 45,800 46,000 48,000 48,000  +2 inherent bonus to Wis Create various cold effects Create various protection effects Flies as if affected by overland flight; fly speed 40 ft., capacity 800 lb. Emanates continuous unhallow effect  55,000 56,250 58,250 60,000 60,000  APPENDIX 1  Item Name Drums of panic Ioun stone, orange prism Ioun stone, pale green prism Lantern of revealing Runestaff of the architect Runestaff of ethereal action  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  Page D255 D260 D260 D261 M176 M178  48,250 49,000 49,000 50,000 50,000 50,000 50,100 51,000 54,000 54,000 54,000 55,000 55,000 55,000 55,000 55,000 55,000  263  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 263  12/21/06 6:03:40 AM  MAGIC ITEMS BY PRICE  APPENDIX 1  Tools (cont.) Page M171 M173 D236 M172 D236 D253 M154 D263 D243 D244 D244 D244 D244 D244 D245 D253 D259 D263 D236 M165 M164 D244 D257 M181 D236 M171 D253 D244 M154 D263 D268 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D247 M172 D262 D267 M164 D250 D250 D252 D267 D245 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 M164 M165 D236 D261  Item Name Psychoactive skin of fiery response Rod of force Rod of rulership Psychoactive skin of the troll Rod of security Cube of force Cognizance crystal, 15 points Pearl of power, 8th-level spell Staff of abjuration Staff of conjuration Staff of enchantment Staff of evocation Staff of illusion Staff of necromancy Staff of transmutation Crystal ball with telepathy Horn of blasting, greater Pearl of power, two spells Metamagic rod, Empower, greater Metamagic rod, Reach, greater Memento magica, 7th-level spell Staff of divination Gem of seeing Runestaff of passage Metamagic rod, Quicken Psychoactive skin of the hero Crystal ball with true seeing Staff of earth and stone Cognizance crystal, 17 points Pearl of power, 9th-level spell Well of many worlds Manual of bodily health +3 Manual of gainful exercise +3 Manual of quickness in action +3 Tome of clear thought +3 Tome of leadership and influence +3 Tome of understanding +3 Apparatus of Kwalish Psychoactive skin of the psion Mirror of opposition Strand of prayer beads, greater Memento magica, 8th-level spell Bowl of commanding water elementals Brazier of commanding fire elementals Censer of controlling air elementals Stone of controlling earth elementals Staff of the woodlands Manual of bodily health +4 Manual of gainful exercise +4 Manual of quickness in action +4 Tome of clear thought +4 Tome of leadership and influence +4 Tome of understanding +4 Memento magica, 9th-level spell Metamagic rod, Chaining, greater Metamagic rod, Maximize, greater Manual of bodily health +5  Effect Market Price (gp) Blasts opponents who made attacks against you last round 60,000 5/day create various force-based effects 60,000 Rule up to 300 HD of creatures, 500 minutes total 60,000 Heal 5 points of damage/minute, regrow lost body parts 61,000 Transports creatures to nondimensional pocket paradise 61,000 36 charges, produce cubes made of walls of force, charges renewed daily 62,000 Stores up to 15 power points 64,000 1/day regain one 8th-level spell already cast 64,000 Create various abjuration effects 65,000 Create various conjuration effects 65,000 Create various enchantment effects 65,000 Create various evocation effects 65,000 Create various illusion effects 65,000 Create various necromancy effects 65,000 Create various transmutation effects 65,000 Scrying at will, can use telepathy at will through crystal ball 70,000 1/day (or more) deals sonic damage, stuns, and deafens creatures 70,000 Regain two spells already cast (different levels, 6th or lower) 70,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Empower Spell 73,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Reach Spell 73,000 1/day regain a previously used 7th-level spell slot 73,500 Create various divination effects 73,500 See as though affected by true seeing, 30 minutes total per day 75,000 Create various passage effects by expending arcane spells or spell slots 75,000 3/day cast a spell of up to 6th level as though affected by Quicken Spell 75,500 +3 to AC, +3 on saving throws and attack rolls 77,000 Scrying at will, can use true seeing at will through crystal ball 80,000 Create various earth and movement effects 80,500 Stores up to 17 power points 81,000 1/day regain one 9th-level spell already cast 81,000 Transports objects or creatures to a random other world or plane 82,000 +3 inherent bonus to Con 82,500 +3 inherent bonus to Str 82,500 +3 inherent bonus to Dex 82,500 +3 inherent bonus to Int +3 inherent bonus to Cha  82,500 82,500  +3 inherent bonus to Wis Functional submarine fits two Medium creatures +7 power points/day, spell resistance 21 Creates exact double of whoever looks into mirror, which attacks original Creates various divine spells effects 1/day regain a previously used 8th-level spell slot Summon one water elemental at a time, at will  82,500 90,000 90,000 92,000 95,800 96,000 100,000  Summon one fire elemental at a time, at will  100,000  Summon one air elemental at a time, at will  100,000  Summon one earth elemental at a time, at will  100,000  Create various nature effects +4 inherent bonus to Con +4 inherent bonus to Str +4 inherent bonus to Dex +4 inherent bonus to Int +4 inherent bonus to Cha  101,250 110,000 110,000 110,000 110,000 110,000  +4 inherent bonus to Wis 1/day regain a previously used 9th-level spell slot  110,000 121,500  3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Chain Spell 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Maximize Spell +5 inherent bonus to Con  121,500 121,500 137,500  264  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 264  12/21/06 6:03:43 AM  Tools (cont.) Page D262 D262 D268 D268  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  Item Name Effect Market Price (gp) Manual of gainful exercise +5 +5 inherent bonus to Str 137,500 Manual of quickness in action +5 +5 inherent bonus to Dex 137,500 Tome of clear thought +5 +5 inherent bonus to Int 137,500 Tome of leadership and +5 inherent bonus to Cha 137,500 influence +5 D268 Tome of understanding +5 +5 inherent bonus to Wis 137,500 D255 Efreeti bottle Contains imprisoned efreeti who (usually) serves character each time released 145,000 D244 Staff of life Create healing and resurrection effects 155,750 D252 Chaos diamond Create various chaos-themed spell effects 160,000 D254 Cubic gate Open a gate or transport self and those around you to one of six planes 164,000 D261 Iron flask 1/day capture extraplanar creature and force it to serve you for 1 hour 170,000 D236 Metamagic rod, Quicken, greater 3/day cast a spell of up to 9th level as though affected by Quicken Spell 170,000 D245 Staff of passage Create various transportation effects 170,500 D262 Mirror of mental prowess Create various divination spell effects, use as a transport portal 175,000 D262 Mirror of life trapping Extradimensionally imprisons up to fifteen creatures who look at it 200,000 1 Price of scroll does not include cost of expensive material components required for the given spell. Such a cost must be added to the listed price of the scroll, when necessary.  Appendix 2: Random Treasure This appendix presents a new random treasure generation system for DMs to use when creating random treasure hoards. It contains all the items from Magic Item Compendium and the Dungeon Master’s Guide.  WHY NEW TABLES? This new set of tables is designed to make random treasure generation quicker, easier, and more consistent. The DMG tables can produce powerful items even at low levels, which can be exciting, but the party can also end up with too little gold or items for their level. These tables are geared for keeping the party’s treasure in line with Table 3–3: Treasure Values per Encounter on page 51 of the DMG. It’s now far less likely that you will get hardly any gold, hardly any goods, and hardly any items. Each level’s entry has three tiers: low treasure, average treasure, and high treasure. Within each tier, the individual results are balanced toward more gold, more goods, or more items (and the top tier is high everything). Now you need to roll only once to get all three results. Goods are no longer separated into gems and art, and they are now coded with letters. An “A” indicates a gem or art piece worth 10 gp, a “B” corresponds to 50 gp, and so on. An expanded list of samples increases your choices. Magic items have been organized by item levels to make it easier to determine what is considered a reasonable item for a party to find. This arrangement streamlines the process, eliminating many of the rolls formerly needed to generate an item. These tables also collect all the items from both books in one place, increasing the variety of items you can generate. Because this book contains more useful items for low-level characters, hoards will have more interesting items if you use these tables. Page: The page number where the item can be found is indicated in this column, along with a letter code to describe the book it is in. Most entries begin either with “M” to indicate Magic Item Compendium or “D” for Dungeon Master’s Guide. Items that use individual spells (such as wands, scrolls, and potions) use “P” to reference spell descriptions in the Player’s Handbook or “S” for those in Spell Compendium.  HOW TO USE THE TABLES Using the tables involves four basic steps: Step 1: Roll on Table A–1: Treasure, using the monster’s CR to determine which row you will use. Step 2: Roll the number of dice indicated and multiply as shown to determine the number of coins. Step 3: Use Table A–2: Goods to generate each piece using the letter codes provided. You can either roll dice to determine its value or use the given average value. Repeat if you have multiple goods. You might want to choose a type of gem or art from the sample goods list for a flavorful description. Step 4: Find the table that lists items of the level or levels in the “Items” column on the table you referred to. For instance, if you are generating a treasure for a CR4 monster and you roll a 30, that result provides one 2nd-level item and one 1st-level item. Go to the 2nd-Level Items table on page 270 and roll for that item, then to the 1st-Level Items table on page 269 and roll for that item. Each entry on the item level tables gives a source where the item is described: a page number preceded by a letter symbol. Most page numbers are preceded either by “M” to indicate Magic Item Compendium or “D” for Dungeon Master’s Guide. Items that use individual spells (such as wands, scrolls, and potions) use “P” to reference spell descriptions in the Player’s Handbook or “S” for those in Spell Compendium. The scrolls, potions, and wands on these tables are not a complete list of all possible items—just the ones that are most useful. If you want to substitute a different spell for one of these items, use a spell of the same level, taking the cost of expensive components into account if necessary. All listings for scrolls specify whether their spells are arcane (A), divine (D), or either (A or D). If you don’t like a particular item, feel free to substitute one of the same level or many items of a lower level (as described in Equipping a PC on page 228). Repeat this step if you have multiple items. Usually, that’s all you have to do to generate a complete treasure. However, random armor, shields, and weapons require more work. These entries refer you to the tables you will use to generate these types of items. A guide to creating random armor, shields, and weapons can be found on page 282.  265  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 265  12/21/06 6:03:45 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  Table A–1: Treasure CR 6  d% 01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  Coins 1d10×1,000 sp 1d8×1,000 sp 1d12×1,000 sp 1d12×100 gp 1d8×100 gp 2d6×100 gp 2d6×100 gp 2d8×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×10 pp  Goods — D, B C, C C, D B, D, E C, D E, F D, E E, F B, D, E  Items 3 3 3, 1 3, 1 3, 1 4 3, 1 4, 2 5 6  — — 1 1, 1/2 1, 1 1, 1, 1/2 1, 1/2 1, 1 2 2  7  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  2d8×1,000 sp 2d6×1,000 sp 2d8×1,000 sp 2d8×100 gp 3d4×100 gp 2d8×100 gp 2d8×100 gp 2d8×100 gp 3d4×100 gp 2d8×10 pp  — D, C D E E, D, C E E, D E E, D E, D  3 3 3, 1 4 4 4, 2 4, 2 5, 1 6 7  — B — C C, C B, B C, C C, C C, B, B D, B  1 1 2 2 2 2, 1 2, 1/2 2, 1 3 3  8  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  2d10×1,000 sp 2d8×1,000 sp 2d8×100 gp 2d10×100 gp 4d4×100 gp 4d4×100 gp 4d4×100 gp 2d10×100 gp 2d10×10 pp 2d10×10 pp  D E D, C E, C E, D, D E, C F, C F F, C F, C  4 4 4, 1 5 5 6 6 6, 3 7 8  1d8×1,000 sp 1d6×1,000 sp 1d8×1,000 sp 1d10×1,000 sp 1d8×1,000 sp 1d8×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×10 pp  — C — B, C B, D B, C B, D D C, C, C C, D  1, 1/2 1, 1 2, 1 2, 1 2, 1 3 2, 1 3 3, 1 4  9  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  2d12×1,000 sp 2d10×1,000 sp 2d10×100 gp 4d6×100 gp 2d12×100 gp 2d12×100 gp 3d10×100 gp 3d10×100 gp 4d6×10 pp 2d12×10 pp  D, C E, C E F F, D F F, D F F, D F, D  4 4, 1 5 5 6 6, 3 6, 2 7 8 9  1d12×1,000 sp 1d8×1,000 sp 1d10×1,000 sp 1d12×1,000 sp 1d6×1,000 sp 1d6×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d6×100 gp 1d12×10 pp  — D — B, D C, E B, D C, E B, C, D B, B, E C, E  2 2 3 3 3 4 3 4 5 5  10  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  3d8×1,000 sp 2d12×1,000 sp 3d8×100 gp 6d4×100 gp 4d6×100 gp 4d6×100 gp 3d10×100 gp 3d10×10 pp 6d4×10 pp 3d10×10 pp  E F E, D F, E F, F F, E, D F, F, D F, F F, F, D F, F, D  5 5 6 6, 1 6, 2 7 7 8 9 10  CR 1  d% 01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  Coins — 1d3×1,000 cp 1d3×100 sp 3d6×100 sp 4d4×100 sp 2d8×10 gp 2d4×100 gp 1d6×100 gp 2d4×100 gp 1d12×10 pp  Goods — — — A B A A B A B  Items — — 1/2 1 1 1, 1/2 — 1 1, 1/2 1, 1/2  2  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  2d12×1,000 cp 3d6×100 sp 2d4×100 sp 1d6×1,000 sp 1d4×1,000 sp 1d4×100 gp 1d10×100 gp 1d10×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 2d8×10 pp  — A, A — — A, B B B A, A B B  3  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  1d4×1,000 sp 1d4×1,000 sp 1d4×1,000 sp 1d8×1,000 sp 1d6×1,000 sp 1d8×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×100 gp 1d12×10 pp  4  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  5  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  266  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 266  12/21/06 6:03:46 AM  Coins 6d4×1,000 sp 4d6×1,000 sp 4d6×100 gp 4d8×100 gp 6d4×100 gp 6d4×100 gp 4d10×100 gp 4d10×10 pp 3d10×10 pp 4d10×10 pp  Goods F F, E F F, F G F, F, D G, F G, E G, F G, F  Items 6 6 7 7 7, 2 8 8 9 10 11  CR 16  d% 01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  Coins 1d12×1,000 gp 1d10×1,000 gp 1d10×1,000 gp 3d4×1,000 gp 1d12×1,000 gp 1d12×1,000 gp 3d4×100 pp 3d4×100 pp 2d6×100 pp 3d4×100 pp  Goods G, E H G, F H, G I H, G I, F, E I, E I, F, E I, F, E  Items 11 11 12 12, 6 13 13, 8 14 14, 8 15 16  12  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  3d12×1,000 sp 4d8×1,000 sp 3d12×1,000 sp 3d12×100 gp 1d4×1,000 gp 1d4×1,000 gp 1d6×1,000 gp 1d6×100 pp 1d4×100 pp 1d6×100 pp  F F, D, C F G G, E G H G, F, F H H  7 7 8 8 8 9 9 10 11 12  17  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  3d4×1,000 gp 1d12×1,000 gp 1d12×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 3d4×1,000 gp 3d4×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 3d4×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp  H H, F, F H, F I I, G I I, G I I, G I, G  12 12 13 13 14 14, 7 15 16 17 18  13  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  4d12×100 gp 1d4×1,000 gp 1d4×1,000 gp 1d8×1,000 gp 1d6×1,000 gp 1d6×1,000 gp 1d8×1,000 gp 1d8×100 pp 1d6×100 pp 1d8×100 pp  F F, E, C F, C G, D G, F G, E H, E H H, F H, F  8 8 9 9 10 10, 5 11 11, 5 12 13  18  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  2d8×1,000 gp 3d4×1,000 gp 3d4×1,000 gp 4d4×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 4d4×100 pp 4d4×100 pp 2d8×100 pp 4d4×100 pp  H, G I H, G I I, H I, F I, G I, F I, G I, G  13 14 14, 9 15 15 16 17 18 19 20  14  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  1d6×1,000 gp 1d6×1,000 gp 1d6×1,000 gp 2d4×1,000 gp 1d8×1,000 gp 1d8×1,000 gp 2d4×1,000 gp 2d4×100 pp 1d8×100 pp 2d4×100 pp  F, D F, E F, D G, F H G, F H, F H H, G H, G  9 9 10 10, 5 11 11, 6 12 12, 5 13 14  19  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  3d6×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 2d8×1,000 gp 3d8×1,000 gp 2d10×1,000 gp 2d10×100 pp 3d8×100 pp 3d8×100 pp 3d6×100 pp 3d8×100 pp  I I, F I I, F I, H I, F I, H I, F I, H I, H  14 15 15, 7 16 16, 10 17 18 19 20 21  15  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  2d4×1,000 gp 1d8×1,000 gp 1d8×1,000 gp 1d12×1,000 gp 1d10×1,000 gp 1d10×1,000 gp 2d6×100 pp 2d6×100 pp 1d12×100 pp 1d12×100 pp  G G, F G, E H, F H, G H, F H, G, E H, G H, G, F H, G, F  10 10 11 11 12 12, 8 13 13, 6 14 15  20  01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–95 96–99 99–100  2d12×1,000 gp 2d10×1,000 gp 2d10×1,000 gp 4d6×1,000 gp 2d12×1,000 gp 2d12×100 pp 4d6×100 pp 4d6×100 pp 2d12×100 pp 2d12×100 pp 2d12×100 pp  I, F, F I, H I, F, F I, H I, H, G I, H I, H, G I, H I, H, G I, H, G I, I  15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25  APPENDIX 2  d% 01–07 08–10 11–21 22–44 45–60 61–78 79–83 84–91 92–99 100  RANDOM TREASURES  CR 11  267  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 267  12/21/06 6:03:51 AM  Table A–2: Goods  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  Type A B C D E F G H I  Value 4d4 gp 2d4×10 gp 4d4×10 gp 1d4×100 gp 2d4×100 gp 4d4×100 gp 1d4×1,000 gp 2d4×1,000 gp 4d4×1,000 gp  Average 10 gp 50 gp 100 gp 250 gp 500 gp 1,000 gp 2,500 gp 5,000 gp 10,000 gp  Sample Gems/Art Type A: Average Value 10 gp banded, eye, or moss agate azurite blue quartz hematite lapis lazuli malachite obsidian rhodochrosite tiger eye turquoise freshwater pearl steel pledge pin boarskin hat embroidered linen blanket platter carved from maple sealskin boots teak bowl cotton tunic with royal crest bronze spectacles granite dice satin belt hammered brass wine cup Type B: Average Value 50 gp bloodstone carnelian chalcedony chrysoprase citrine iolite jasper moonstone onyx peridot clear quartz sard sardonyx rose, smoky, or star rose quartz zircon silver ewer carved bone or ivory statuette small gold bracelet bronze statue of a knight mahogany bust of a poet silver ring with blue quartz small perfume bottle of black crystal purple velvet gloves with silver stitching ornate wooden box bronze earrings set with ceramic ovals copper horn ringed with seashells oak candlestick mahogany tray carved with flowers rhinoceros-hide sack  peacock-feather mask broad-brimmed velvet hat zircon-studded dancing slippers Type C: Average Value 100 gp amber amethyst chrysoberyl coral red or brown-green garnet jade jet white, golden, pink, or silver pearl red, red-brown or deep green spinel tourmaline cloth of gold vestments black velvet mask adorned with citrines silver chalice with lapis inlay coral saucer heraldic banner edged with swan feathers marble relief of dwarf wrestlers copper anklet plated with silver prayer mat with inlaid gold thread Type D: Average Value 250 gp large wool tapestry brass mug with jade inlays harp painted with pastoral scene mountain landscape in ash frame wall hanging of a forest in black ink velvet cloak with eagle feathers small marble statue of an athlete granite cup carved with staring eyes ivory bust of a high priest mithral circlet engraved with elvish poetry dragonhide gloves onyx hourglass set with malachite coral brooch with oval jasper setting gold anklet with bloodstone cabochons adamantine armband with filigree carvings oil painting of a royal wedding jade cameo pendant life-size darkwood cat sculpture with yellow topaz eyes Type E: Average Value 500 gp alexandrite aquamarine violet garnet black pearl deep blue spinel golden yellow topaz silver comb with moonstones silver-plated scabbard with jet cabochons carved darkwood harp with ivory inlay and zircon gems solid gold idol (10 lb.) linen tapestry depicting giants destroying a town obsidian statue of a hunting dog painting of a sailing ship onyx sphere with trees carved in relief silk banner embroidered with performing musician small masterpiece portrait in gold frame inlaid with opal  Type F: Average Value 1,000 gp emerald white, black, or fire opal blue sapphire fiery yellow or rich purple corundum blue or black star sapphire star ruby gold dragon comb with red garnet eye gold and topaz bottle stopper cork ceremonial electrum dagger with star ruby in pommel eyepatch with mock eye of sapphire and moonstone fire opal pendant on gold chain masterpiece portrait of an elite general dinosaurhide tapestry depicting a mage mother-of-pearl statue of a naga mithral comb with opal runes silver crown with opal inlay vestments of celestial lion fur set of six gold and silver bells with jeweled handles Type G: Average Value 2,500 gp embroidered silk and velvet mantle with moonstones sapphire pendant on gold chain embroidered and bejeweled glove jeweled anklet golden circlet with four aquamarines necklace of pink pearls basalt pyramid with images of dragons inlaid in gems lead crown adorned with black pearls bejeweled gold tiara shaped like dragon horns bronze music box with pearl inlay mahogany bracelet plated with gold and platinum dragonhide formal shoes with electrum buckles Type H: Average Value 5,000 gp bright green emerald blue-white, canary, pink, brown, or blue diamond jacinth jeweled gold crown jeweled electrum ring bone mug set with opals platinum sunburst crown Type I: Average Value 10,000 gp gold and ruby ring gold cup set with emeralds regal scepter set with sapphires platinum locket ringed with garnets mithral statue of a noble horse platinum tiara gilt dragon’s skull with opal eyes and adamantine teeth  268  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 268  12/21/06 6:03:54 AM  1/2-Level Items  82–83 84–85 86–88 89–90 91–92 93–94 95–98 99–100  P271 P278 S229 D264 M185 P128 P130 D268  1st-Level Items Item Name Acid Lantern, bullseye Scroll of caltropsSC (A) Scroll of create water (D) Scroll of dancing lights (A) Scroll of dawnSC (D) Scroll of detect magic (A or D) Scroll of light (A or D) Scroll of message (A) Scroll of purify food and drink (D) Alchemist’s fire Rope, silk (100 ft.) Smokesticks Holy symbol, silver Holy water Scroll of aspect of the wolfSC (D) Scroll of benign transpositionSC (A) Scroll of blessed aimSC (D) Scroll of comprehend languages (A or D) Scroll of cure light wounds (D) Scroll of disguise self (A) Scroll of endure elements (A or D) Scroll of hail of stone SC (A) Scroll of mount (A) Scroll of protection from chaos (A or D) Scroll of protection from evil (A or D) Scroll of protection from good (A or D) Scroll of protection from law (A or D) Scroll of remove fear (A or D) Scroll of resurgenceSC (D) Scroll of sanctuary (D) Scroll of signSC (D) Scroll of snake’s swiftnessSC (D) Scroll of speak with animals (D) Scroll of lesser vigorSC (D) Thunderstone Antitoxin Blessed bandage (5) Disguise kit Healer’s kit Oil of magic weapon Potion of cure light wounds Potion of endure elements Potion of enlarge person Potion of mage armor Potion of magic fang Potion of protection from chaos/evil/ good/law Potion of remove fear Potion of shield of faith +2 Potion of lesser vigorSC Quaal’s feather token, anchor Skill shard Tanglefoot bag Thieves’ tools, masterwork Universal solvent  d% 01–04 05–07 08–10 11 12–14 15 16 17–18 19 20–21 22–25 26 27 28 29–30 31–32 33–34 35–37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44–45 46–49 50–52 53–55 56–57 58 59 60 61 62–63 64–71 72–73 74 75–78 79–84 85 86 87 88–89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  Page P219 P248 P269 P130 P124 M64 D228 P205 P205 P128 P243 M156 D255 S23 P203 P207 P208 P216 P216 P217 S76 P230 S102 P236 P245 P246 P271 P272 P272 P275 P279 D268 S27 P205 P215 P226 S229 P249 P251 P269 S173 S174 P278 S193 P125 P125 P125 P125 P125 P125 P125 P126 P124 P125  Item Name Wand of detect magic (10 charges) Wand of light (10 charges) Wand of read magic (10 charges) Climber’s kit Chain shirt Crystal of illumination, least Sleep arrow Oil of bless weapon Scroll of bless weapon (D) Everburning torch Scroll of identify (A) Daylight pellet Elixir of love Scroll of baleful transpositionSC (A) Scroll of bear’s endurance (A or D) Scroll of bull’s strength (A or D) Scroll of cat’s grace (A or D) Scroll of cure moderate wounds (D) Scroll of darkvision (A) Scroll of delay poison (D) Scroll of earthbindSC (A or D) Scroll of find traps (D) Scroll of ghost touch armorSC (A or D) Scroll of glitterdust (A) Scroll of invisibility (A) Scroll of knock (A) Scroll of remove paralysis (D) Scroll of resist energy (A or D) Scroll of lesser restoration (D) Scroll of see invisibility (A) Scroll of silence (D) Unguent of timelessness Wand of benign transpositionSC (10 charges) Wand of bless (10 charges) Wand of cure light wounds (10 charges) Wand of enlarge person (10 charges) Wand of lesser vigorSC (10 charges) Wand of mage armor (10 charges) Wand of magic missile (CL 1st, 10 charges) Wand of ray of enfeeblement (10 charges) Wand of repair light damage SC (10 charges) Wand of resurgence SC (10 charges) Wand of shield (10 charges) Wand of snake’s swiftnessSC (10 charges) Light wooden shield, masterwork Heavy wooden shield, masterwork Light steel shield, masterwork Buckler, masterwork Leather, masterwork Hide armor, masterwork Heavy steel shield, masterwork Studded leather, masterwork Chainmail Tower shield, masterwork  APPENDIX 2  Page P128 P126 S42 P215 P216 S59 P219 P248 P253 P267 P128 P127 P128 P130 P128 S16 S27 S31 P212 P215 P222 P226 S108 P256 P266 P266 P266 P266 P271 S174 P274 S189 S193 P281 S229 P129 P128 M152 P130 P130 P251 P215 P226 P226 P249 P250 P266  RANDOM TREASURES  d% 01 02–03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12–13 14–16 17–18 19–20 21–22 23 24 25 26 27–28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44–45 46–47 48–49 50–51 52–53 54–56 57–65 66–68 69–71 72–75 76–78 79–81  269  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 269  12/21/06 6:03:56 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  2nd-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34–37 38 39 40 41 42 43–44 45 46 47–48 49–50 51 52 53 54 55 56–58 59 60 61 62–63 64 65–66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75  270  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 270  Page P200 M25 M160 D264 M185 M188 P124 D221 D221 M25 D255 D255 D255 D255 D256 M162 M162 M131 D266 M24 M64 M153 M65 M65 M26 M159 M52 P216 P203 P203 P206 P207 P208 P216 P216 P217 P225 P233 P245 P272 P248 P259 P271 P272 P278 P283 D264 M186 D227 M282 D228 D227 P124 M160 P214 P216 P216 P223 P231 P232 P239 P245 P248 P249 P249  Item Name Scroll of arcane lock (A) Crystal of lifekeeping, least Everfull mug Quaal’s feather token, fan Skill shard, greater Tanglepatch Chain shirt, masterwork Darkwood shield Darkwood buckler Crystal of aquatic action, least Dust of tracelessness Elixir of hiding Elixir of sneaking Elixir of swimming Elixir of vision Incense of concentration Jumping caltrops Safewing emblem Silversheen Crystal of adamant armor, least Crystal of adamant weaponry, least Blight stone Crystal of return, least Crystal of security, least Crystal of stamina, least Elixir of flaming fists Fountainhead arrow Oil of darkness Potion of barkskin +2 Potion of bear’s endurance Potion of blur Potion of bull’s strength Potion of cat’s grace Potion of cure moderate wounds Potion of darkvision Potion of delay poison Potion of eagle’s splendor Potion of fox’s cunning Potion of invisibility Potion of lesser restoration Potion of levitate Potion of owl’s wisdom Potion of remove paralysis Potion of resist energy (type) 10 Potion of shield of faith +3 Potion of spider climb Quaal’s feather token, bird Stench stone Screaming bolt Masterwork weapon Silver dagger, masterwork Cold iron longsword, masterwork Breastplate, masterwork Everlasting rations Scroll of create food and water (D) Scroll of cure serious wounds (D) Scroll of daylight (A or D) Scroll of dispel magic (A or D) Scroll of fireball (A) Scroll of fly (A) Scroll of haste (A) Scroll of invisibility purge (D) Scroll of lightning bolt (A) Scroll of magic circle against chaos (A or D) Scroll of magic circle against evil (A or D)  76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94–95 96 97 98–99 100  P250 P250 P257 P266 P270 P270 P271 S193 P281 P294 S229 S229 P300 M70 M85 M64 M64 M26 M158 M159 M163 D264 M66  Scroll of magic circle against good (A or D) Scroll of magic circle against law (A or D) Scroll of neutralize poison (D) Scroll of protection from energy (A or D) Scroll of remove blindness/deafness (D) Scroll of remove curse (D) Scroll of remove disease (D) Scroll of mass snake’s swiftnessSC (D) Scroll of speak with dead (D) Scroll of tongues (A) Scroll of vigorSC (D) Scroll of mass lesser vigorSC (D) Scroll of water breathing (A or D) Amulet of toxin delay Charm of countersong Crystal of illumination, lesser Crystal of life drinking, least Crystal of screening, least Electric eel elixir Essentia jewel Life ring Quaal’s feather token, tree Revelation crystal, least  3rd-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42  Page M161 D264 M68 M68 M72 M46 M77 M83 M85 M85 M86 M86 M86 M86 M64 M24 M24 M64 M25 M25 M25 M25 M158 M158 D256 M26 M163 M65 D264 M120 M26 M26 M133 M139 M188 M190 M147 M118 M76 M78 M113 M118  Item Name Glitter stone Quaal’s feather token, swan boat Amber amulet of vermin, giant bee Amulet of aquatic salvation Arcanist’s gloves Arrow (or bolt) of biting Boots of landing Brute gauntlets Chronocharm of the celestial wanderer Chronocharm of the fateweaver Chronocharm of the grand master Chronocharm of the horizon walker Chronocharm of the laughing rogue Chronocharm of the uncaring archmage Crystal of energy assault, least Clasp of energy protection, least Crystal of adaptation, least Crystal of arcane steel, least Crystal of arrow deflection, least Crystal of bent sight Crystal of glancing blows, least Crystal of mind cloaking, least Dust of dispersion Elixir of adamantine blood Elixir of truth Iron ward diamond, least Magic bedroll Phoenix ash threat, least Quaal’s feather token, whip Reach gauntlets Restful crystal Rubicund frenzy, least Shiftweave Symbol of transfiguration Talisman of the disk Troll gut rope Watch lamp Necklace of copper dragon scales Boots of agile leaping Boots of stomping Lenses of bright vision Pearl of speech  12/21/06 6:03:59 AM  47 48  M68 M68  49  M68  50  M68  51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74–75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82  P272 P196 P215 S59 P217 P221 P222 P233 P243 P245 S129 P247 S152 P270 S175 P275 P294 M186 M90 M110 P251 P246 P251 P216 P223 P232 P234 P250 P239 P240 P249  83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  P257 P266 P270 P270 P271 S229 P300 M169 M184 P251 M68 M151 M160 M72 M215 M169 M176 P272  Potion of barkskin +3 Potion of shield of faith +4 Wink brooch Amber amulet of vermin, giant praying mantis Amber amulet of vermin, giant queen ant Amber amulet of vermin, Huge monstrous centipede Amber amulet of vermin, Huge monstrous scorpion Amber amulet of vermin, Large monstrous spider Potion of resist energy (type) 20 (A or D) Scroll of air walk (D) Scroll of cure critical woundsSC (D) Scroll of darkvision, massSC (A) Scroll of death ward (D) Scroll of dimensional anchor (A or D) Scroll of dismissal (D) Scroll of freedom of movement (D) Scroll of ice storm (A) Scroll of greater invisibility (A) Scroll of know vulnerabilitiesSC (A) Scroll of Leomund’s secure shelter (A) Scroll of panaceaSC (D) Scroll of remove curse (A or D) Scroll of revenance SC (D) Scroll of sending (D) Scroll of tongues (D) Soulvoid orb Crest of bravery Healing belt Oil of greater magic weapon +1 Oil of keen edge Oil of magic vestment +1 Potion of cure serious wounds Potion of displacement Potion of fly Potion of gaseous form Potion of greater magic fang +1 Potion of haste Potion of heroism Potion of magic circle against chaos/evil/ good/law Potion of neutralize poison Potion of protection from energy Potion of remove blindness/deafness Potion of remove curse Potion of remove disease Potion of vigorSC Potion of water breathing Powder of the black veil Scrying beacon Wand of magic missile (CL 5th, 10 charges) Amber amulet of vermin, giant wasp Bag of endless caltrops Everlasting feedbag Armband of elusive action Ephod of authoritySP Porcupine elixir Rope of stone Scroll of restoration (D)  4th-Level Items d% 01 02 03  Page P215 P226 P249  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 271  Item Name Eternal wand of cure light wounds Eternal wand of enlarge person Eternal wand of mage armor  04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64–73 74 75 76 77 78  P251 P266  Eternal wand of magic missile Eternal wand of protection from chaos/evil/ good/law P269 Eternal wand of ray of enfeeblement S173 Eternal wand of repair light damage SC P278 Eternal wand of shield D255 Dust of dryness M67 Acrobat boots D248 Bag of tricks, gray M152 Blast disk M26 Crystal of stamina, lesser D258 Hand of the mage M167 Pearl of brain lock M118 Piercer cloak P203 Potion of barkskin +4 P203 Wand of bear’s endurance (10 charges) P206 Wand of blur (10 charges) P207 Wand of bull’s strength (10 charges) P208 Wand of cat’s grace (10 charges) P216 Wand of cure moderate wounds (10 charges) P217 Wand of delay poison (10 charges) P245 Wand of invisibility (10 charges) P246 Wand of knock (10 charges) P254 Wand of mirror image (10 charges) S173 Wand of repair moderate damageSC (10 charges) P274 Wand of scorching ray (10 charges) P275 Wand of see invisibility (10 charges) P284 Scroll of stoneskin (A) D250 Bracers of armor +1 M82 Brawler’s gauntlets M83 Brooch of stability M211 Burning veilSP M87 Cloak of elemental protection D253 Cloak of resistance +1 M154 Cognizance crystal, 1 point M25 Crystal of aquatic action, lesser M64 Crystal of illumination, greater M25 Crystal of lifekeeping, lesser M65 Crystal of return, lesser M26 Crystal of screening, lesser M65 Crystal of security, lesser M65 Demolition crystal, least M94 Dispelling cord M158 Drums of marching M96 Eagle claw talisman M65 Fiendslayer crystal, least M102 Gauntlets of energy transformation M107 Gloves of spell disruption M204 Gloves of the starry skySP M161 Glyph seal M113 Lightning gauntlets D263 Pearl of power, 1st-level spell D264 Phylactery of faithfulness M120 Reliquary holy symbol M173 Replenishing skin M66 Revelation crystal, lesser M122 Ring of brief blessing D266 Salve of slipperiness M141 Third eye improvisation M66 Truedeath crystal, least M147 Vest of resistance +1 M282 +1 armor/shield D221 Mithral heavy shield P237 Potion of good hope D220 Mithral shirt D255 Elixir of fire breath P272 Potion of resist energy (type) 30  APPENDIX 2  P203 P278 M148 M68  RANDOM TREASURES  43 44 45 46  271  12/21/06 6:04:01 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  P207 P212 S64 P222 P223 S92 S96 P256 P262 P275 P292 S229 D264 M68 M157 M157 D255 P251 P251 P203 P250 D257  Scroll of break enchantment (A) Scroll of contact other plane (A) Scroll of greater dimension doorSC (A) Scroll of dismissal (A) Scroll of disrupting weapon (D) Scroll of fire shield, massSC (A) Scroll of mass flySC (A) Scroll of Mordenkainen’s private sanctum (A) Scroll of plane shift (D) Scroll of sending (A) Scroll of teleport (A) Scroll of vigorous circle SC (D) Pipes of the sewers Amber amulet of vermin, giant stag beetle Dragon’s draught, brass Dragon’s draught, white Dust of illusion Oil of greater magic weapon +2 Oil of magic vestment +2 Potion of barkskin +5 Potion of greater magic fang +2 Goggles of minute seeing  5th-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25–26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43  Page M151 M161 M116 M183 M184 M136 P251 M148 P296 M24 M64 M71 M150 M193 M208 M150 M75 M81 M87 M201 M158 M215 M174 M175 M184 M186 M197 M138 M150 M80 D250 M153 M24 M24 M64 M96 M97 M160 M161 M113 D226 M196  Item Name Beetle elixir Fochlucan bandore Medal of gallantry Salve of minor spell resistance Scrying shard Snakeblood tooth Wand of magic missile (CL 9th, 10 charges) Wyrmfang amulet Scroll of true seeing (D) Crystal of adamant armor, lesser Crystal of adamant weaponry, lesser Anklet of translocation Arcane thieves’ tools Armband of confrontationSP Badge of valorSP Bag of boulders Blighter’s hex-eye Bracers of quick strike Cloak of predatory vigor Cobra strapsSP Ehlonna’s seed pouchR Lenses of revelationSP Rod of frost Rod of sliding Sending stones (pair) Spool of endless rope Standard of valorSP Steadfast boots Aroma of dreams Bracers of great collision Brooch of shielding Camouflage paint Clasp of energy protection, lesser Crystal of adaptation, lesser Crystal of life drinking, lesser Empowered spellshard, 1st-level spell Enduring amulet Exploding spike Hammersphere Inquisitor bracers Javelin of lightning Medal of steadfast honorSP  44 45 46 47 48–49 50–51 52–53 54–55 56–57 58–59 60–61 62 63 64 65–67 68–70 71 72–72 73 74–76 77–80 81 82–83 84–85 86–87 88 89 90–92 93–94 95 96–97 98–99 100  M164 M72 M72 M74 M77 M78 M190 M110 M173 P124 D263 P205 P208 S48 P222 P223 S80 P230 S103 P239 P239 P277 P285 P302 D255 M105 D258 P251 P251 D264 P250 D265 M186  Memento magica, 1st-level spell Artificer’s monocle Bear helm Belt of one mighty blow Boots of dragonstriding Boots of the mountain king Tome of worldly memory Headband of the lorebinder Rhino elixir Full plate, masterwork Necklace of fireballs type I Scroll of blade barrier (D) Scroll of chain lightning (A) Scroll of cloak of the seaSC (A) Scroll of disintegrate (A) Scroll of greater dispel magic (A or D) Scroll of energy immunitySC (D) Scroll of find the path (D) Scroll of ghost trapSC (D) Scroll of harm (D) Scroll of heal (D) Scroll of shadow walk (A) Scroll of stone to flesh (A) Scroll of wind walk (D) Dust of appearance Githborn talisman Hat of disguise Oil of greater magic weapon +3 Oil of magic vestment +3 Pipes of sounding Potion of greater magic fang +3 Quiver of Ehlonna Sphere of awakening  6th-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31  Page M68 D246 M69 M70 M74 M76 M80 M84 M84 M212 M64 M93 M94 M95 M95 M160 M101 M103 M103 M104 M105 M106 M108 M108 M108 M109 M111 M208 D259 D259 M26  Item Name Adamantine mind blade gauntlets Amulet of natural armor +1 Amulet of retributive healing Amulet of teamwork Belt of theft-healing Boots of the battle charger Bracers of the entangling blast Caduceus bracers Cape of the viper Caustic veilSP Crystal of arcane steel, lesser Devastation gauntlets Dimension stride boots Dragon spirit amulet Dragon spirit cincture Field provisions box Gauntlets of arrow reflection Gauntlets of extended range Gauntlets of giantfelling Gauntlets of throwing Gloves of fortunate striking Gloves of lightning Goggles of lifesight Goodberry bracelet Greatreach bracers Headband of conscious effort Helm of battle Helm of tacticsSP Heward’s handy haversack Horn of fog Iron ward diamond, lesser  272  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 272  12/21/06 6:04:04 AM  7th-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65  Page S174 M157 M157 P251 P251 P250 D265 P175 D266 D248 D250 M77 D250 D251 M153 D253 M87 M90 M155 M91 M91 M25 D256 M105 M108 D266 M162 D230 D232 D233 D233 M138 M141 M141 M144 M145 M202 M141 M64 M26 M165 D263 M201 D267 P275 M149 M77 M162 M53 D248 D248 M73 M83 D252 M87 M24 M90 M215 M90 M24 M25 M25 M26 M65 M65  Item Name Scroll of restoration, massSC (D) Dragon’s draught, black Dragon’s draught, copper Oil of greater magic weapon +4 Oil of magic vestment +4 Potion of greater magic fang +4 Robe of bones Scroll of revenance SC (A) Sovereign glue Bag of holding type I Boots of elvenkind Boots of jumping Boots of the winterlands Candle of truth Censer of the last breathR Cloak of elvenkind Cloak of quills Counterstrike bracers Crystal anchor of alertness Crystal mask of knowledge Crystal mask of languages Crystal of arrow deflection, lesser Eyes of the eagle Gloves of eldritch admixture Goggles of foefinding Golembane scarab Icy strand of the north Ring of climbing Ring of jumping Ring of sustenance Ring of swimming Spellsight spectacles Third eye dampening Third eye expose Tunic of steady spellcasting Vanisher cloak Bands of blood rage SP Third eye freedom Crystal of energy assault, lesser Crystal of stamina, greater Metamagic rod, Substitution, lesser Necklace of fireballs type II Panther mask SP Stone of alarm Wand of searing light (CL 6th, 10 charges) Aberrant sphere Boots of desperation Infinite scrollcase Meteoric knife Bag of tricks, rust Bead of force Belt of growth Burnoose of 1,001 thorns Chime of opening Circlet of solace Clasp of energy protection, greater Contact medallion Cord of favorSP Corsair’s eye patch Crystal of adaptation, greater Crystal of aquatic action, greater Crystal of glancing blows, lesser Crystal of screening, greater Crystal of security, greater Demolition crystal, lesser  APPENDIX 2  88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  M116 Mask of sweet air M167 Orb of environmental adaptation M168 Pearl of breath crisis M65 Phoenix ash threat, lesser M120 Rearguard’s cape M122 Ring of communication M123 Ring of floating M124 Ring of four winds M126 Ring of piercing spells D232 Ring of protection +1 M122 Ring of the darkhidden M127 Ring of silent spells M130 Rock boots M174 Rod of grievous wounds M176 Rod of viscid globs M26 Rubicund frenzy, lesser M133 Sepulchral vest M136 Silkslick belt M185 Slashing sand M138 Spellsink scarab M143 Torc of displacement M146 Vest of defense M282 +1 weapon M69 Amulet of incarnum shielding M97 Enemy spirit pouch M163 Mac-Fuirmidh cithern M143 Third eye surge S176 Scroll of revivifySC (D) M21 Shield of mercy M105 Gloves of agile striking D232 Ring of feather falling D255 Elemental gem M162 Healing salve P207 Wand of call lightning (10 charges) P216 Wand of cure serious wounds (10 charges) P223 Wand of dispel magic (10 charges) P223 Wand of displacement (10 charges) P231 Wand of fireball (10 charges) P232 Wand of fly (10 charges) P239 Wand of haste (10 charges) P245 Wand of invisibility sphere (10 charges) P248 Wand of lightning bolt (10 charges) S229 Wand of mass lesser vigorSC (10 charges) S173 Wand of repair serious damageSC (10 charges) S229 Wand of vigorSC (10 charges) P203 Scroll of banishment (A) S80 Scroll of energy immunitySC (A) P227 Scroll of ethereal jaunt (A or D) P245 Scroll of invisibility, mass (A) P256 Scroll of Mordenkainen’s magnificent mansion (A) P270 Scroll of regenerate (D) P282 Scroll of spell turning (A) P289 Scroll of sunbeam (D) P293 Scroll of teleport, greater (A) D228 Slaying arrow M70 Amulet of tears M80 Bracers of arcane freedom M81 Bracers of opportunity M83 Brute ring M89 Cloak of weaponry M174 Rod of fumbling M121 Repelling gauntlets M131 Sandals of sprinting  RANDOM TREASURES  32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54–60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87  273  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 273  12/21/06 6:04:06 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  M96 M97 M65 M106 M107 M110 D260 D236 D236 M165 D236 P251 P251 P250 D266 S39 P215 P217 P221 P222 P225 P231 S130 P242 S125 P245 P253 P262 P262 P289 M136 M188 M141 D226 D226  Empowered spellshard, 2nd-level spell Essentia helm Fiendslayer crystal, lesser Gloves of manual prowess Gloves of object reading Heartseeking amulet Horseshoes of speed Metamagic rod, Enlarge, lesser Metamagic rod, Extend, lesser Metamagic rod, Sculpting, lesser Metamagic rod, Silent, lesser Oil of greater magic weapon +5 Oil of magic vestment +5 Potion of greater magic fang +5 Rope of climbing Scroll of brilliant auraSC (D) Scroll of cure critical wounds, mass (D) Scroll of death ward, massSC (D) Scroll of dimensional lock (A or D) Scroll of discern location (D) Scroll of earthquake (D) Scroll of fire storm (D) Scroll of ghostformSC (A) Scroll of horrid wilting (A) Scroll of invisibility, superiorSC (A) Scroll of iron body (A) Scroll of mind blank (A) Scroll of greater plane shift (A) Scroll of polar ray (A) Scroll of sunburst (D) Soulsmite gauntlets Talisman of undead mastery Third eye clarity Adamantine dagger Adamantine battleaxe  8th-Level Items  274  d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 274  Page M82 D221 M154 M107 M112 M167 M168 M119 M173 M187 M145 M80 M98 M100 M111 M119 M136 M156 M115 M120 M137 M187 M143 D220 M24 M64 M214 M48 M109 M132  Item Name Brooch of avoidance Caster’s shield Chime of harmonic agony Gloves of the uldra savant Hexbands Orb of mental renewal Pipes of frenzied revelryR Rapidstrike bracers Rod of bodily restoration Summoner’s totem Vanguard treads Bracers of the blast barrier Eyes of expanded vision Formless vest Hellcat gauntlets Rags of restraint Skirmisher boots Domain draught Mask of blood Reins of ascension Spellmight bracers Survival pouch Torc of the titans Dragonhide plate Crystal of adamant armor, greater Crystal of adamant weaponry, greater Badge of glorySP Bow of the wintermoonR Hair shirt of suffering Scout’s headband  31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97–100  M20 M151 M195 M157 M157 D255 M100 D261 M114 M193 M119 M172 M210 M126 M173 M185 M185 M144 M75 M159 M165 M117 M121 M133 D256 P233 P239 D246 M79 M79 D250 M81 D253 D253 M154 M25 M65 M94 M216 D257 M103 D257 D257 M161 M205 D258 D260 D261 M115 M200 M118 D263 D263 M118 D263 D230 M175 M175 M133 D267 M206 M139 M143 M213 M147 M190 M282  Mithralmist shirt Bag of flames Crystal of alacritySP Dragon’s draught, bronze Dragon’s draught, green Dust of disappearance Finned gauntlets Lens of detection Lockpicking ring Mask of masterySP Quicksilver boots Radiant sphere Raptor’s mask SP Ring of mystic healing Rod of escape Shard of the sunR Sleeping spike True strike gauntlets Belt of ultimate athleticism Enveloping pitR Mirror of suggestion Mithral bells Rending gauntlets Shadow maniple Figurine of wondrous power, silver raven Scroll of freedom (A) Scroll of heal, mass (D) Amulet of health +2 Boots of the unending journeyR Bracers of accuracy Bracers of armor +2 Bracers of repulsion Cloak of Charisma +2 Cloak of resistance +2 Cognizance crystal, 3 points Crystal of mind cloaking, lesser Crystal of return, greater Dragon mask Gauntlets of ghost fightingSP Gauntlets of ogre power Gauntlets of the talonR Gloves of arrow snaring Gloves of Dexterity +2 Glyph seal, greater Goggles of the golden sunSP Headband of intellect +2 Ioun stone, clear spindle Keoghtom’s ointment Mask of mental armor Mask of the tigerSP Necklace of warning Nolzur’s marvelous pigments Pearl of power, 2nd-level spell Pendant of joy Periapt of Wisdom +2 Ring of counterspells Rod of silence Rod of sure striking Scry shroud Stone salve Stormfire ringSP Surcoat of valor Torc of power preservation Veil of stormsSP Vest of resistance +2 Wilding clasp +2 armor/shield  12/21/06 6:04:08 AM  9th-Level Items  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 275  Item Name Slaying arrow, greater Armbands of might Doss lute Crystal echoblade Elven chain Barricade buckler Circlet of wild surging Wand of cure critical wounds (10 charges) Wand of death ward (10 charges) Wand of freedom of movement (10 charges) Wand of greater invisibility (10 charges) Wand of ice storm (10 charges) Wand of repair critical damage SC (10 charges) White cloak of the spider Shatterspike Living chain Necklace of fireballs type III Strand of lightning Sacred scabbard Thorn pouch Eternal wand of blur Eternal wand of cure moderate wounds Eternal wand of invisibility Eternal wand of mirror image Eternal wand of repair moderate damageSC Eternal wand of see invisibility Eternal wand of snake’s swiftnessSC Eternal wand of web Scroll of greater restoration (D) Aroma of curdled death Barbs of retributionSP Belt of the championR Circlet of persuasion Dragon’s draught, blue Dragon’s draught, silver Gem of the glitterdepthR Goggles of day Helm of the purple plume R Mask of lies Ring of vengeance Wand of dispel magic (CL 10th, 10 charges) Wand of fireball (CL 10th, 10 charges) Wand of lightning bolt (CL 10th, 10 charges) Wand of searing light (CL 10th, 10 charges) Shield of the severed handR Bowstaff Personal oasis Bladed crossbow Slippers of spider climbing Scroll of teleportation circle (A) Incense of meditation Amulet of fortune prevailing Bag of holding type II Belt of hidden pouches Bolt shirt Boots of swift passage Boots of tremorsense Bracers of aerial combat SP Bracers of archery, lesser Bracers of blinding strike SP Bracers of retaliation Circlet of mages Cloak of soulbound resistance Collar of healing Crimson dragonhide bracers  70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  M25 M25 M25 M66 M93 M156 M95 M65 M99 M102 M103 M104 M109 M111 M208 D235 D260 M113 M116 M166 M167 M119 M169 M120 M66 M122 M125 M60 M144 M147 M66  Crystal of arrow deflection, greater Crystal of glancing blows, greater Crystal of lifekeeping, greater Truedeath crystal, lesser Deathstrike bracers Diamondskin decanter Dragonscale cloakR Fiendslayer crystal, greater Fiery tunic Gauntlets of eldritch energy Gauntlets of lassitude Ghost shroud Hand of the oak father Helm of gazes Horn of resilience SP Immovable rod Ioun stone, dusty rose prism Ki straps Mask of silent trickery Noble pennon Orb of blinding Platinum helmR Portable foxhole Reciprocal bracers Revelation crystal, greater Ring of arming Ring of master artifice, lesser Spider fang Vampire torc Vestments of ebonsilkR Witchlight reservoir  APPENDIX 2  Page D228 M72 M156 M49 D220 M16 M87 P215 P217 P233 P245 P243 S173 M148 D228 M53 D2263 M187 M183 M188 P206 P216 P245 P254 S173 P275 S193 P301 P272 M150 M203 M73 D252 M157 M157 M104 M107 M111 M115 M128 P223 P231 P248 P275 M22 M48 M168 M47 D266 P293 D260 M69 D248 M74 M75 M78 M79 M194 D250 M198 M82 M86 M88 M89 M90  RANDOM TREASURES  d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08–09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42–43 44–45 46–47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69  10th-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06  Page M56 M123 M101 M52 D220 D259  07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33  M164 D268 M52 M46 M62 M53 D256 D262 D263 D250 M157 M157 M99 M176 M140 M189 D268 M21 D221 M111 M111 M60 M199 D263 M68 D246 M71  Item Name Raptor arrowR Ring of the forcewall Gauntlets of the blood-lordR Hooked hammer of the hearthfire R Rhino hide Helm of comprehend languages and read magic Map of unseen landsR Vest of escape Galeb duhr hammer Assassin whip Trident of serenity Manticore greatsword Eversmoking bottle Murlynd’s spoon Necklace of fireballs type IV Boots of striding and springing Dragon’s draught, gold Dragon’s draught, red Eyes of truth Rope of climbing, superior Tabard of the great crusade R Tome of ancient lore R Wind fan Shield of the resolute R Spined shield Helm of glorious recovery Helm of heroes Staff of the unyielding oakR Claw glovesSP Necklace of fireballs type V Amulet of emergency healing Amulet of mighty fists +1 Amulet of wordtwisting  275  12/21/06 6:04:10 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  34 35 36 37 38 33 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75–77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  276  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 276  M74 M76 M78 M88 M155 M155 M64 M64 M93 M96 M97 M99 M104 M161 M109 D260 M164 M205 M64 M65 M65 D264 M169 M170 M170 M121 M123 M127 M128 M58 M175 M26 M184 M216 M59 M139 M140 M143 M144 M144 M144 P268 M196 M24 M136 D257 D248 M101 M63 M50 M201 M63 M50 M60 M61 M61 D252 M101 M108 M193 D259 M117 M118 M215 M130  Belt of priestly might Boots of big stepping Boots of sidestepping Cloak of the salamander Conduit rod Cornucopia of the needfulR Crystal of arcane steel, greater Crystal of life drinking, greater Deathguardian bracers Empowered spellshard, 3rd-level spell Executioner’s hoodR Farspeaking amulet Gauntlets of weaponry arcane Globe of sunlight Gwaeron’s boots Horseshoes of a zephyr Memento magica, 2nd-level spell Periapt of the sullen seaSP Crystal of energy assault, greater Demolition crystal, greater Phoenix ash threat, greater Pipes of haunting Psychoactive skin of the celestial Psychoactive skin of ectoplasmic armor Psychoactive skin of the fiend Ring of adamantine touch Ring of essentia Ring of thunderclaps Ring of water breathing Rod of surprises Rod of transposition Rubicund frenzy, greater Shackles of silence Shirt of wraith stalkingSP Spectral dagger Strongarm bracers Tabard of the disembodiedR Torc of heroic sacrifice Toxic gloves Transposer cloak Unicorn pendant Scroll of raise dead (D) Shield of vigorSP Wrapped tower Skull plaque Gloves of swimming and climbing Bag of tricks, tan Gauntlets of the blazing arc Whip of webs Dagger of defiance Scorpion kamaSP Viperblade Death spike Stonereaver Swordbow, light Swordbow Circlet of blasting, minor Gauntlet of infinite blades Greater piwafwi Helm of wounding sight SP Horn of goodness/evil Monocle of perusal Phoenix helm Phylactery of virtue SP Robe of retaliation  11th-Level Items d% 01 02–03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29–31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45–47 48–50 51–53 54–56 57–59 60–62 63 64 65 66 67 68 69 70 71 72 73–76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84–100  Page M192 P284 M61 M78 M194 M105 D266 M190 M213 M51 M72 D249 D253 D250 M54 M56 M60 D248 D263 D250 M96 D258 M114 M125 M125 M126 M189 D246 M204 M152 M85 M88 M64 M100 M101 M52 M105 M106 D258 D258 M112 D260 D260 D260 D260 D260 D260 M26 M114 M200 M195 M116 M117 M119 M121 M123 D232 D232 M177 M132 M183 M135 M188 M142 M144 M282  Item Name Gauntlets of destructionSP Wand of stoneskin (10 charges) Swordbow, great Boots of skating Gloves of endless javelinsSP Gloves of flame Robe of useful items Tomebound eye of Boccob Veil of whispersSP The fist Armband of maximized healing Folding boat Cloak of the manta ray Bottle of air Morningstar of the manyR Rod of defiance Stunshot sling Bag of holding type III Periapt of health Boots of levitation Dreaming blindfold Harp of charming Lore gem Ring of mystic defiance Ring of mystic fire Ring of mystic lightning Tome of the stilled tongueR Amulet of natural armor +2 Belt of the wide earthSP Blast globes Chasuble of fell power Cloak of stone Crystal of energy assault, greater Flesh ring of scorn Gauntlet of Gruumsh Ghost net Gloves of the balanced hand Gloves of incarnum theft Golem manual, flesh Hand of glory Horned helm Ioun stone, deep red sphere Ioun stone, incandescent blue sphere Ioun stone, pale blue rhomboid Ioun stone, pink and green sphere Ioun stone, pink rhomboid Ioun stone, scarlet and blue sphere Iron ward diamond, greater Lightning tunic Mantle of the predatorSP Medallion of aerial defenseSP Mesmerist’s gloves Mindvault Psionatrix Ring of antivenom Ring of entropic deflection Ring of mind shielding Ring of protection +2 Runestaff of charming Scentblinder Scrolls of uncertain provenanceR Shirt of the leech Talisman of undying fortitude Third eye penetrate Vambraces of warding +2 weapon  12/21/06 6:04:13 AM  12th-Level Items  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 277  Item Name Canaith mandolin Deck of illusions Necklace of fireballs type VI Mace of the dark children Millennial chainmailR Dragonfang gauntlets Owlfeather armor Fanged mask Dagger of venom Warlock’s scepter Blazing skylance Forceful skylance Axe of ancestral virtue R Candle of invocation Runestaff of fire Crown of flamesSP Ring of force shield Ring of the ram Necklace of fireballs type VII Ankh of ascension Battle bridle Blindfold of true darkness Bracers of armor +3 Cat’s-eye brooch Cloak of resistance +3 Cognizance crystal, 5 points Daern’s instant tent Decanter of endless water Helm of the hunterSP Metamagic rod, Empower, lesser Metamagic rod, Reach, lesser Mirror of time hop Necklace of adaptation Pearl of power, 3rd-level spell Retributive amulet Rod of the recluseR Sandals of the light stepSP Scepter of the netherworld Shirt of bone Shirt of chains Shirt of the treant Stunning spike Vest of resistance +3 +3 armor/shield Dwarf crusher Figurine of wondrous power, serpentine owl Wight hide shield Lion’s shield Skewer-of-gnomesR Spear of retributionR DawnstarR Pick of piercing Sword of virtue beyond reproachR Rapier of desperate measuresR Rapier of unerring directionR Sword of mighty thewsR Strand of prayer beads, lesser Angelhelm Runestaff of the assassin Bag of holding type IV Bracers of wind Crystal mask of detection Crystal mask of discernment Crystal mask of dread Crystal mask of mindarmor  68 69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  M92 M92 M25 D268 M98 M99 D256 D256 M104 D257 D260 M113 M117 M171 M122 D230 D232 D233 M126 M127 M130 M174 M175 M131 M185 M137 D267 M140 M141 M141 M142 M66 M146  Crystal mask of psionic craft Crystal mask of visual insight Crystal of mind cloaking, greater Druid’s vestment Eyes of power leech Fiendhelm Figurine of wondrous power, bronze griffon Figurine of wondrous power, ebony fly Ghoul gauntlets Glove of storing Ioun stone, dark blue rhomboid Lenses of true form Mind blade gauntlet, lesser Psychoactive skin of power damping Ring of avoidance Ring of improved climbing Ring of improved jumping Ring of improved swimming Ring of self-sufficiency Ring of soulbound protection Robe of mysterious conjuration Rod of reversalR Rod of undead mastery Sandals of springing Soul anchor Soulstone Stone horse, courser Third eye aware Third eye concentrate Third eye gather Third eye powerthieve Truedeath crystal, greater Vest of the master evoker  APPENDIX 2  Page M153 D254 D263 M53 M20 M95 M20 M99 D226 M63 M48 M52 M46 D251 M180 M209 D232 D232 D263 M71 M151 M75 D250 M84 D253 M154 M155 D254 M194 D236 M165 M165 D263 D263 M121 M57 M198 M183 M134 M134 M136 M187 M147 M282 M51 D256 M23 D221 M59 M59 M50 M54 M61 M55 M55 M60 D267 M71 M177 D248 M82 M90 M90 M91 M92  RANDOM TREASURES  d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44–46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67  13th-Level Items d% 01 02 03–04 05 06–07 08 09 10 11 12 13–14 15 16–19 20 21–22 23–25 26 27 28 29 30–31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41–42 43  Page D252 D229 M18 M18 D219 M210 M47 M165 D236 M56 M139 M187 P216 P223 P245 P248 S193 S173 D230 M69 M79 M206 M89 M103 D236 D236 M165 D236 D264 D234 M178 M212  Item Name Cape of the mountebank Trident of warning Foxhide armor Ghoul shell armor Adamantine breastplate Talon scepterSP Axe of the sea reavers Metamagic rod, Substitution Rod of metal and mineral detection Rod of cats Storm gauntlets Strand of acid pearls Eternal wand of cure serious wounds Eternal wand of displacement Eternal wand of invisibility sphere Eternal wand of lightning bolt Eternal wand of mass snake’s swiftnessSC Eternal wand of repair serious damageSC Ring of animal friendship Amulet of inviolate form Boots of tracklessness Bracers of lightningSP Cloak of turn resistance Gauntlets of mindfire Metamagic rod, Enlarge Metamagic rod, Extend Metamagic rod, Sculpting Metamagic rod, Silent Phylactery of undead turning Rod of cancellation Runestaff of eyes Veil of doorsSP  277  12/21/06 6:04:15 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  44 45–46 47–48 49 50–51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62–64 65–66 67–68 69 70 71 72 73 74–75 76 77 78–79 80 81 82–84 85 86 87 88 89 90–91 92 93 94 95 96 97 98–99 100  D257 M125 M73 M203 D250 M156 M160 D258 D258 M162 M115 D262 D264 M170 M121 D232 M127 D237 M131 M178 M181 M135 M137 M198 M147 M148 M195 M20 M19 P272 M49 M58 M48 D249 M109 D230 D228 M84 M88 M100 D257 D261 D248 D236  Gauntlet of rust Ring of lightning flashes Belt of battle Blood claw chokerSP Boots of speed Dove’s harp Flesheater Goggles of night Golem manual, clay Horn of plenty Mantle of second chances Medallion of thoughts Pipes of pain Psychoactive skin of the claw Riding boots Ring of energy resistance, minor Ring of spell-battle Rod of wonder Ruby cincture of immutability Runestaff of entrapment Runestaff of size alteration Shirt of resilience Spare hand Vest of free movement SP Wand bracelet Water cloak Winged vest SP Serpent armor Hawkfeather armor Scroll of resurrection (D) Chromatic rodR Rogue blade Bow of songs Boccob’s blessed book Hat of anonymity Ring of chameleon power Shifter’s sorrow Cannith goggles Cloak of soulbound resistance, greater Fireflower pendant Gem of brightness Lyre of building Monk’s belt Python rod  14th-Level Items  278  d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 278  Page M19 M192 M164 M216 D252 M107 M162 M165 D236 M181 M61 M145 M17 M23 M16 D267 D248 M72 M151 M75 M86  Item Name Kyton armor Breastplate of terrorSP Memento magica, 3rd-level spell Choker of life protectionSP Cloak of arachnida Gloves of the titan’s grip Harrow rod Metamagic rod, Chaining, lesser Metamagic rod, Maximize, lesser Runestaff of night Tentacle rod Veil of allure Electric eel hide Wight armor Bearskin armor Stone horse, destrier Belt of dwarvenkind Badge of the svirfneblin Banner of the storm’s eye Blindhelm Circlet of rapid casting  22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67–70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91  M93 Desperation chain M112 Incarnum focus (DM’s choice) M118 Moonstone mask D264 Periapt of wound closure M171 Psychoactive skin of nimbleness M170 Psychoactive skin of the chameleon M172 Quiver of energy D233 Ring of water walking D235 Rod of flame extinguishing M58 Rod of whips M181 Runestaff of opening M134 Shirt of angels M134 Shirt of demonskin M134 Shirt of the fey M134 Shirt of the inevitable M135 Shirt of ironskin M135 Shirt of slaadskin M135 Shirt of the moon M186 Spider rod M142 Third eye repudiate D260 Horn of the tritons D263 Pearl of the sirines D256 Figurine of wondrous power, onyx dog M68 Amulet of catapsi D246 Amulet of health +4 D248 Belt of giant strength +4 D250 Bracers of armor +4 D253 Cloak of Charisma +4 D253 Cloak of resistance +4 M154 Cognizance crystal, 7 points D257 Gloves of Dexterity +4 M107 Goggles of draconic vision D258 Headband of intellect +4 D263 Pearl of power, 4th-level spell D263 Periapt of Wisdom +4 M122 Ring of dragon friendship M124 Ring of greater counterspells M182 Runestaff of the undying M182 Runestaff of vision D266 Scabbard of keen edges M212 Serpent veilSP M133 Shadow veil M147 Vest of resistance +4 M147 War wizard cloak D250 Winged boots M282 +4 armor/shield M24 Zombie hide armor D256 Figurine of wondrous power, golden lions D220 Dwarven plate D244 Staff of charming D252 Chime of interruption M16 Armor of the fallen leavesR D250 Broom of flying D256 Figurine of wondrous power, marble elephant M22 Tigerskin armor D221 Winged shield D246 Amulet of natural armor +3 M85 Chasuble of fell power, greater M157 Dragondoom scepter M108 Goggles of the ebon hunter D260 Ioun stone, iridescent spindle M122 Ring of divergence M124 Ring of the icy soul D232 Ring of protection +3 D233 Ring of spell storing, minor M130 Rogue’s vest M180 Runestaff of forced happiness  12/21/06 6:04:17 AM  92 M139 93–100 M282  Surge crystal +3 weapon  15th-Level Items  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 279  Item Name Assassin’s dagger Cli lyre Dragonrider armor Rod of enervating strike Rod of freedom Trident of fish command Banded mail of luck Bracelet of friends Runestaff of illusion Runestaff of transportation Viper rod Beholder crown Bone ring Carpet of flying, 5 ft. by 5 ft. Casting glove Crystal mask of insight Eyes of power leech, vampiric Horn of blasting Ioun stone, pale lavender ellipsoid Ioun stone, pearly white spindle Lens of the desert Portable hole Ring of arcane might Ring of invisibility Ring of wizardry I Runestaff of frost Scarab of stabilization Stone of good luck Water whip Dagger of denialR Ruby bladeR Cudgel that never forgetsR Chain of obeisanceR Flame tongue Figurine of wondrous power, ivory goats Gwaeron’s belt Robe of arcane might Rope of entanglement Runestaff of divination Exoskeleton armor Boots of the mountain king, greater Cloak of battle Golem manual, stone Mask of the skull Turquoise veilSP Luck blade (0 wishes) Lash of sands Sword of subtlety Sword of the planes Celestial armor Runestaff of the artisan Nine lives stealer Mattock of the titans Rod of enemy detection Circlet of blasting, major Amulet of mighty fists +2 Cloak of displacement, minor Helm of underwater action Memento magica, 4th-level spell Mind blade gauntlet Psychoactive skin of celestial embrace Psychoactive skin of fiendish embrace Runestaff of earth and stone  Shroud of scales Third eye sense Overhead shield Metamagic rod, Substitution, greater Metamagic rod, Enlarge, greater Metamagic rod, Extend, greater Metamagic rod, Sculpting, greater Metamagic rod, Silent, greater Quarterstaff of battle Plate armor of the deep Staff of swarming insects Bracers of archery, greater Bracers of armor +5 Cloak of resistance +5 Cognizance crystal, 9 points Eyes of doom Magic siphon Pearl of power, 5th-level spell Ring of evasion Ring of master artifice Ring of X-ray vision Rod of splendor Rod of withering Runestaff of conjuration Runestaff of evocation Runestaff of transmutation Vest of resistance +5 +5 armor/shield  APPENDIX 2  Page D226 M154 M17 M57 M57 D229 D220 D250 M180 M182 D237 M73 M75 D252 M84 M91 M98 D259 D260 D260 M163 D264 M121 D232 D233 M180 M132 D267 M63 M50 M58 M49 M48 D226 D256 M109 M129 D266 M177 M18 M78 M87 D258 D262 M212 D227 M53 D228 D228 D220 M176 D227 D262 D235 D252 D246 D253 D259 M164 M117 M170 M170 M178  M136 M142 M20 M165 D236 D236 M165 D236 M54 D220 D245 D250 D250 D253 M154 D256 M164 D263 D232 M125 D233 D236 D237 M177 M178 M182 M147 M282  RANDOM TREASURES  d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14–15 16–17 18 19 20 21–22 23–24 25 26–27 28 29 30 31 32 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 66 67 68  69 70 71 72 73 74 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82–83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96 97–100  16th-Level Items d% 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19–20 21–22 23–24 25–26 27–28 29–30 31–32 33 34–35 36 37–38 39–45 46 47 48–49 50–51 52–53 54 55–56  Page D262 D220 D227 D228 M80 D252 M88 D261 M127 M177 M59 D220 D253 D259 D263 D230 D265 M177 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D244 D255 D232 D256 D244 P296 D245 D255 D260 D260 D261 M128 M128  Item Name Maul of the titans Breastplate of command Oathbow Sword of life stealing Bracers of dawn Cloak of the bat Cloak of thorns Iron bands of Bilarro Ring of soulbound protection, greater Runestaff of cacophony Scourge of pain Mithral full plate of speed Cube of frost resistance Helm of telepathy Periapt of proof against poison Ring of blinking Robe of scintillating colors Runestaff of destruction Manual of bodily health +1 Manual of gainful exercise +1 Manual of quickness in action +1 Tome of clear thought +1 Tome of leadership and influence +1 Tome of understanding +1 Staff of healing Dimensional shackles Ring of energy resistance, major Figurine of wondrous power, obsidian steed Staff of fire Scroll of true resurrection (D) Staff of size alteration Drums of panic Ioun stone, orange prism Ioun stone, pale green prism Lantern of revealing Ring of vanishing Rings of force armor (pair)  279  12/21/06 6:04:20 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  57 58 59 60–62 63 64–66 67 68 69 70–87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95–96 97 98 99–100  D265 M176 M178 D246 M170 D232 M176 M178 M180 M282 M150 D236 M165 D237 M112 M180 D247 D252 D258 D236 M182  Robe of blending Runestaff of the architect Runestaff of ethereal action Amulet of natural armor +4 Psychoactive skin of the defender Ring of protection +4 Runestaff of abjuration Runestaff of enchantment Runestaff of necromancy +4 weapon Anstruth harp Metamagic rod, Empower Metamagic rod, Reach Rod of thunder and lightning Impervious vestment Runestaff of illumination Amulet of proof against detection and location Carpet of flying, 5 ft. by 10 ft. Golem manual, iron Metamagic rod, Quicken, lesser Runestaff of time  17th-Level Items  280  d% 01–03 04–06 07–08 09–11 12 13 14–16 17–19 20 21–22 23–25 26–27 28–29 30 31–39 40 41 42–43 44–45 46–47 48–49 50–51 52 53–54 55 56–57 58–59 60–62 63 64 65 66–71 72–73 74–75 76 77–78 79 80 81–82 83 84–88 89–90 91–92 93–95  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 280  Page D246 D248 D250 D253 M88 M154 D257 D258 D260 D263 D263 M126 M126 M190 M282 M23 M129 D236 M182 M164 M206 D266 M51 M181 D227 M56 M70 D260 M171 M172 D265 D232 D233 M132 D227 M17 D253 M117 M79 D258 D232 M126 D267 M180  Item Name Amulet of health +6 Belt of giant strength +6 Bracers of armor +6 Cloak of Charisma +6 Cloak of the salamander, greater Cognizance crystal, 11 points Gloves of Dexterity +6 Headband of intellect +6 Ioun stone, vibrant purple prism Pearl of power, 6th-level spell Periapt of Wisdom +6 Ring of negative protection Ring of positive protection Truelight lantern +6 armor/shield Vampire hide armor Robe of the inferno Rod of negation Runestaff of the undead slayer Memento magica, 5th-level spell Robe of thunderSP Scarab of protection Explosive sling Runestaff of power Mace of terror Rod of celestial might Amulet of second chances Ioun stone, lavender and green ellipsoid Psychoactive skin of iron Psychoactive skin of the spider Ring gates Ring of freedom of movement Ring of wizardry II Scarab of invulnerability Life-drinker Earthplate armor Crystal ball Mind blade gauntlet, greater Boots of temporal acceleration Golem manual, greater stone Ring of energy resistance, greater Ring of nine lives Strand of prayer beads Runestaff of insanity  96–97 98 99 100  D229 D263 M178 M62  Sylvan scimitar Orb of storms Runestaff of fiendish darkness Tentacle rod, greater  18th-Level Items d% 01 02 03–05 06 07 08–13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21–24 25 26 27 28 29–42 43 44 45 46 47 48 49 50 51 52–53 54 55 56 57 58 59–60 61–62 63–64 65–66 67–68 69–70 71 72 73 74 75–76 77 78 79–81 82 83 84 85 86 87 88 89 90–93 94 95 96–100  Page D244 D250 D250 M154 D263 M282 D246 D253 M206 D253 D260 M210 D232 D232 D232 D233 D234 D235 M282 M166 D221 D227 D228 D253 D220 D246 M164 M165 D236 D268 D226 D253 D254 M95 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D256 D244 D265 D244 D252 D254 M171 M128 M173 D236 D226 M172 M125 D236 D253 D227 D250 M154 D263 M282  Item Name Staff of illumination Boots of teleportation Bracers of armor +7 Cognizance crystal, 13 points Pearl of power, 7th-level spell +7 armor/shield Amulet of natural armor +5 Cloak of displacement, major Cloudwalker ankletsSP Crystal ball with see invisibility Horn of Valhalla Phoenix cloak SP Ring of friend shield (pair) Ring of protection +5 Ring of shooting stars Ring of spell storing Rod of absorption Rod of flailing +5 weapon Ollamh harp Absorbing shield Rapier of puncturing Sun blade Crystal ball with detect thoughts Demon armor Amulet of mighty fists +3 Memento magica, 6th-level spell Metamagic rod, Chaining Metamagic rod, Maximize Wings of flying Frost brand Cloak of etherealness Daern’s instant fortress Dragon’s eye amulet Manual of bodily health +2 Manual of gainful exercise +2 Manual of quickness in action +2 Tome of clear thought +2 Tome of leadership and influence +2 Tome of understanding +2 Eyes of charming Staff of frost Robe of stars Staff of defense Carpet of flying, 10 ft. by 10 ft. Darkskull Psychoactive skin of fiery response Ring of universal energy resistance, minor Rod of force Rod of rulership Dwarven thrower Psychoactive skin of the troll Ring of master artifice, greater Rod of security Cube of force Luck blade (1 wish) Bracers of armor +8 Cognizance crystal, 15 points Pearl of power, 8th-level spell +8 armor/shield  12/21/06 6:04:22 AM  19th-Level Items  21st-Level Items  20th-Level Items d% 01–03 04–05 06–08 09–14 15 16–19 20–23 24–27 28–31 32–35 36–39 40–42 43 44–47 48–49 50–53 54–55 56–57 58–59 60–61 62–65 66–67 68–82 83–84 85–86 87–88 89–90 91–92 93–94 95–100  Page D244 M154 D263 M282 D268 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D234 D247 D261 M172 D232 D262 D267 D246 M164 D233 D256 M282 D233 D250 D250 D252 D233 D267 M282  Item Name Staff of earth and stone Cognizance crystal, 17 points Pearl of power, 9th-level spell +9 armor/shield Well of many worlds Manual of bodily health +3 Manual of gainful exercise +3 Manual of quickness in action +3 Tome of clear thought +3 Tome of leadership and influence +3 Tome of understanding +3 Rod of alertness Apparatus of Kwalish Mantle of spell resistance Psychoactive skin of the psion Ring of regeneration Mirror of opposition Strand of prayer beads, greater Amulet of mighty fists +4 Memento magica, 8th-level spell Ring of three wishes Eyes of petrification +7 weapon Ring of spell turning Bowl of commanding water elementals Brazier of commanding fire elementals Censer of controlling air elementals Ring of wizardry IV Stone of controlling earth elementals +10 armor/shield  d% 01–06 07–14 15–23 24–32 33–41 42–50 51–59 60–68 69–74 75–83 84–90 91–95 96–100  Page D245 D227 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268 D247 M128 D265 M141 M141  Item Name Staff of the woodlands Luck blade (2 wishes) Manual of bodily health +4 Manual of gainful exercise +4 Manual of quickness in action +4 Tome of clear thought +4 Tome of leadership and influence +4 Tome of understanding +4 Amulet of the planes Ring of universal energy resistance, major Robe of eyes Third eye conceal Third eye dominate  22nd-Level Items d% 01–10 11–15 16–20 21–25 26–29 30–33 34–58 59–65 66–72 73–79 80–86 87–93 94–100  Page D226 M164 M165 D236 D258 D230 M282 D261 D262 D262 D268 D268 D268  Item Name Holy avenger Memento magica, 9th-level spell Metamagic rod, Chaining, greater Metamagic rod, Maximize, greater Helm of brilliance Ring of djinni calling +8 weapon Manual of bodily health +5 Manual of gainful exercise +5 Manual of quickness in action +5 Tome of clear thought +5 Tome of leadership and influence +5 Tome of understanding +5  APPENDIX 2  Page Item Name D243 Staff of abjuration D244 Staff of conjuration D244 Staff of enchantment D244 Staff of evocation D244 Staff of illusion D244 Staff of necromancy D245 Staff of transmutation D253 Crystal ball with telepathy D259 Horn of blasting, greater D263 Pearl of power, two spells D233 Ring of wizardry III D235 Rod of lordly might M282 +6 weapon D236 Metamagic rod, Empower, greater M165 Metamagic rod, Reach, greater D259 Helm of teleportation M164 Memento magica, 7th-level spell D244 Staff of divination D257 Gem of seeing D233 Ring of telekinesis D265 Robe of the archmagi M181 Runestaff of passage D227 Mace of smiting D236 Metamagic rod, Quicken D261 Mantle of faith M171 Psychoactive skin of the hero D253 Crystal ball with true seeing  RANDOM TREASURES  d% 01–03 04–06 07–09 10–12 13–15 16–18 19–21 22–23 24–25 26–28 29–32 33–36 37–52 53–56 57–60 61–62 63–66 67–70 71–73 74–77 78–81 82–85 86–87 88–91 92–94 95–96 97–100  23rd-Level Items d% 01–25 26–43 44–63 64–83 84–100  Page D227 D255 D246 D244 D252  Item Name Luck blade (3 wishes) Efreeti bottle Amulet of mighty fists +5 Staff of life Chaos diamond  24th-Level Items d% 01–30 31–40 41–51 52–61 62–73 74–81 82–100  Page Item Name M282 +9 weapon D254 Cubic gate D261 Iron flask D236 Metamagic rod, Quicken, greater D245 Staff of passage D262 Mirror of mental prowess M128 Ring of universal energy resistance, greater  25th-Level Items d% Page Item Name 01–08 D262 Mirror of life trapping 09–16 D231 Ring of elemental command (air) 17–24 D231 Ring of elemental command (earth) 25–32 D231 Ring of elemental command (fire) 33–40 D231 Ring of elemental command (water) 41–50 D233 Ring of spell storing, major 51–58 M145 Vest of the archmagi 59–88 M282 +10 weapon 89–100 D245 Staff of power* * Though this item’s price actually puts it at 26th level, it is included in this list.  281  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 281  12/21/06 6:04:25 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  RANDOM ARMOR, SHIELDS, AND WEAPONS  To randomly generate magic armor, weapons, or shields, follow these steps: Step 1: Determine the item’s type by rolling on Table A–3: Random Armor/Shield Types or Table A–4: Random Weapon Types. If you are creating an item with a +1 enhancement bonus, you’re done. Otherwise, go to Step 2. Step 2: Go to the table showing the correct bonus value. For example, if you rolled +5 full plate, use the +5 Bonus Table (page 285). This table will tell you whether the item has only an enhancement bonus or both an enhancement bonus and one or more properties. Step 3: If you need to determine any properties, go to Table A–5: Random Armor/Shield Properties or Table A–6: Random Weapon Properties. For armor and shields, roll on the left percentile column if you are generating armor and on the right for a shield. For weapons, roll on the left percentile column for a melee weapon and the right colum for a ranged one. Items that are restricted to more specific types of weapons have footnotes. If you roll a property that is inappropriate for that type of item (as indicated by a note beneath the table), reroll.  Table A–3: Random Armor/Shield Types d% 01–02 03–06 07–21 22–37 38–52 53–55 56–59 60–74 75–77 78–81 82–85 86–92 93 94–95 96 97–98 99 100  Armor or Shield Padded Leather Studded leather Chain shirt Hide Scale mail Chainmail Breastplate Splint mail Banded mail Half-plate Full plate Buckler Shield, light wooden Shield, light steel Shield, heavy wooden Shield, heavy steel Shield, tower  Price 155 gp 160 gp 175 gp 250 gp 165 gp 200 gp 300 gp 350 gp 350 gp 400 gp 750 gp 1,650 gp 165 gp 153 gp 159 gp 157 gp 170 gp 180 gp  Table A–4: Random Weapon Types d% 01–02 03 04 05 06 07–08 09–10 11 12 13 14–15 16–17 18 19 20–21 22 23  Weapon Arrows (50) Axe, orc double Axe, throwing Battleaxe Bolas Bolts, crossbow (50) Bullets, sling (50) Chain, spiked Club Crossbow, hand Crossbow, heavy Crossbow, light Crossbow, repeating heavy Crossbow, repeating light Dagger Dagger, punching Dart  Price 350 gp 660 gp 308 gp 310 gp 305 gp 350 gp 350 gp 325 gp 300 gp 400 gp 350 gp 335 gp 700 gp 550 gp 302 gp 302 gp 300 gp  24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31–32 33 34–35 36 37 38 39 40 41 42 43 44 45–46 47 48 49 50 51 52 53 54–55 56–57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64–65 66 67–68 69 70 71–72 73 74–75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82–83 84 85 86 87–88 89 90–91 92–93 94 95 96 97 98 99 100  Falchion Flail, dire Flail, heavy Flail, light Gauntlet Gauntlet, spiked Glaive Greataxe Greatclub Greatsword Guisarme Halberd Hammer, gnome hooked Hammer, light Handaxe Javelin Kama Kukri Lance Longbow Longbow, composite (+0 Str bonus) Longbow, composite (+1 Str bonus) Longbow, composite (+2 Str bonus) Longbow, composite (+3 Str bonus) Longbow, composite (+4 Str bonus) Longbow, composite (+5 Str bonus) Longspear Longsword Mace, heavy Mace, light Morningstar Net Nunchaku Pick, heavy Pick, light Quarterstaff Ranseur Rapier Sai Sap Scimitar Scythe Shortbow Shortbow, composite (+0 Str bonus) Shortbow, composite (+1 Str bonus) Shortbow, composite (+2 Str bonus) Shortbow, composite (+3 Str bonus) Shortbow, composite (+4 Str bonus) Shortbow, composite (+5 Str bonus) Shortspear Shuriken Siangham Sickle Sling Spear Sword, bastard Sword, short Sword, two-bladed Trident Urgrosh, dwarven Waraxe, dwarven Warhammer Whip Other/DM’s choice  375 gp 690 gp 315 gp 308 gp 302 gp 305 gp 308 gp 320 gp 305 gp 350 gp 309 gp 310 gp 620 gp 301 gp 306 gp 301 gp 302 gp 308 gp 310 gp 375 gp 400 gp 500 gp 600 gp 700 gp 800 gp 900 gp 305 gp 315 gp 312 gp 305 gp 308 gp 320 gp 302 gp 308 gp 304 gp 600 gp 310 gp 320 gp 301 gp 301 gp 315 gp 318 gp 330 gp 375 gp 450 gp 525 gp 625 gp 725 gp 825 gp 301 gp 301 gp 303 gp 306 gp 300 gp 302 gp 335 gp 310 gp 700 gp 315 gp 650 gp 330 gp 312 gp 301 gp —  282  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 282  12/21/06 6:04:27 AM  +2 Bonus d% 01–62 63–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +2 enhancement +1 enhancement, +1 property  +3 Bonus d% 01–44 45–79 80–91 92–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +3 enhancement +2 enhancement, +1 property +1 enhancement, +2 property +1 enhancement, two +1 properties Enhancement Bonus/Property +4 enhancement +3 enhancement, +1 property +2 enhancement, +2 property +1 enhancement, +3 property  +5 Bonus d% 01–40 41–75 76–88 89–95 96–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +5 enhancement +4 enhancement, +1 property +3 enhancement, +2 property +2 enhancement, +3 property +1 enhancement, +4 property  +6 Bonus d% 01–43 44–77 78–89 90–95 96–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +5 enhancement, +1 property +4 enhancement, +2 property +3 enhancement, +3 property +2 enhancement, +4 property +1 enhancement, +5 property  M9 D219 M9 M13 M6 M6 D218 D218 D218 M9 M10 M10 M10 M10 D219 M11 M13 M13 M13 M14 M15 M15 M15 M7 D219 D219 D219 M9 M12 M6 M15 M13  Commander Glamered Daylight Mindarmor Acidic Anchoring Arrow catching Bashing Blinding Blurring Death ward Displacement Dragondodger2 Ectoplasmic feedback Fortification, light Ghost ward Mobility2 Nimbleness Ranged4 Soulbound Styptic Twilight Variable Balance Shadow Silent moves Slick Buoyant Landing Agility, improvedS Stamina, improvedS Quickness  Page M11 M12 M12 M14 M12 M6 D218 D218 M7 M7 M11 M11 M11 M12 M14 M14 D219 M15 M12  Item Name Gilled Linked Manifester Speed Healing Anchoring, greaterS Animated Arrow deflection Axeblock Beastskin Ectoplasmic wall Energy defense S,3 Energy immunity3 Hammerblock Retaliation Spearblock Spell resistance (13) Woodwalk Magic-eating  Page M10 M7 M6 M15 M7 M9 M11 D219  Item Name Deepdweller Balance, improvedS Agility, greaterS Stamina, greaterS Bane blind Blinking Fearsome Shadow, improved  RANDOM TREASURES  d% 01–44 45–79 80–91 92–100  15–17 — 18–23 24–29 30–32 33–36 37–40 41–48 49–56 — 57–59 — — — 60–68 69–76 — — 77–84 85–89 — — 90–100 — — — — — — — — —  APPENDIX 2  +4 Bonus  12–14 15–17 18–20 21–24 25–27 28–31 — — — 32–35 36–38 39–41 42–44 45–47 48–50 51–54 55–58 59–62 — 63–64 65–67 68–70 — 71–73 74–77 78–81 82–85 86–88 89–91 92–94 95–97 98–100  +2 Property  +7 Bonus d% 01–47 48–79 80–92 93–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +5 enhancement, +2 property +4 enhancement, +3 property +3 enhancement, +4 property +2 enhancement, +5 property  +8 Bonus d% 01–52 53–85 86–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +5 enhancement, +3 property +4 enhancement, +4 property +3 enhancement, +5 property  +9 Bonus d% 01–52 53–85 86–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +5 enhancement, +4 property +4 enhancement, +3 property, +2 property +4 enhancement, +5 property*  +10 Bonus d% 01–50 51–85 86–100  Enhancement Bonus/Property +5 enhancement, +3 property, +2 property +5 enhancement, +5 property +4 enhancement, two +3 properties  Armor d% 01–03 04–08 — 09–17 18–25 26–32 — — 33–39 40–43 — 44–51 52–60 61–67 68–73 74–80 81–88 89–93 94–100  Shield d% — 01–08 09–13 14–20 — 21–24 25–33 34–41 42–49 — 50–57 58–66 67–75 76–83 — 84–91 92–100 — —  +3 Property Table A–5: Random Armor/Shield Properties +1 Property Armor d% 01–02 03–04 — 05–06 07–08 09–11  Shield d% — — 01–07 — — 08–14  Page M6 M15 M12 M9 M10 M9  Item Name Agility Stamina Heartening Blueshine1 Easy travel Called  Armor d% 01 02–05 06–09 10–13 14–17 18–22 23–26 27–31  Shield d% — — — — — — 01–07 —  283  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 283  12/21/06 6:04:29 AM  RANDOM TREASURES  APPENDIX 2  32–37 38–42 — 43–46 47–51 52–55 56–59 60–62 63–64 65–69 70–73 74–76 77–81 82–86 87–91 92–96 97–99 100  — — 08–14 — 15–22 23–30 — — 31–33 34–42 43–49 50–54 55–63 64–72 73–81 82–90 91–98 99–100  D219 D219 M7 M9 D219 D219 D219 M14 M14 D219 M15 D219 D217 D218 D218 D218 D219 —  Silent moves, improved Slick, improved Averter Blurring, greaterS Fortification, moderate Ghost touch Invulnerability Roaring Soulbound, greaterS Spell resistance (15) Vanishing Wild Acid resistance Cold resistance Electricity resistance Fire resistance Sonic resistance +2 property, +1 property  Page M13 D219 M13 M12 M7 D219 D219 D219 — —  Item Name Radiant Spell resistance (17) Menacing Healing, greaterS Balance, greaterS Shadow, greater Silent moves, greater Slick, greater +3 property, +1 property two +2 properties  +4 Property Armor d% 01–07 08–19 20–28 29–38 39–48 49–58 59–69 70–78 79–89 90–100  Shield d% — 01–37 — — — — — — 38–62 63–100  +5 Property Armor Shield d% d% Page Item Name 01–04 01–04 D219 Fortification, heavy 05–09 — M11 Freedom — 05–11 D219 Reflecting 10–15 12–18 D219 Spell resistance (19) — 19–24 M15 Time buttress 16–19 25–28 M6 Aporter 20–24 — M12 Masking 25–32 29–36 D217 Acid resistance, improved 33–40 37–44 D218 Cold resistance, improved 41–48 45–52 D218 Electricity resistance, improved 49–56 53–60 D219 Fire resistance, improved 57–63 61–67 D219 Sonic resistance, improved 64–68 — D218 Etherealness 69–70 68–69 D219 Undead controlling 71–76 70–75 D218 Acid resistance, greater 77–82 76–81 D218 Cold resistance, greater 83–88 82–87 D218 Electricity resistance, greater 89–94 88–93 D219 Fire resistance, greater 95–98 94–98 D219 Sonic resistance, greater 99 99 — +4 property, +1 property 100 100 — +3 property, +2 property S Synergy items include the value of their synergy prerequisite properties. 1 Metal armor only. 2 Light armor only. 3 The DM chooses the type of energy for this item. 4 Can’t be applied to tower shields.  Table A–6: Random Weapon Properties +1 Bonus Melee d% 01 02 03–04 05 06 07 08–09 10–11 — 12–13 14 15 16 17–18 19 20 21 22 23 24–25 26 27–28 29 30 31–32 33 — 34 35 — 36–37 38–40 41–43 44–45 46 47–48 49 50 51–52 53 54–57 58 59 60–61 62 63 64 65–66 67 68 69–70 71 72 — 73 74 — 75 — 76 77 78  Ranged d% 01 02 — 03 04–05 06–07 08–09 10–11 12–13 14–15 — 16 17–18 — — — — — — 19–20 21–22 — — 23–24 25 26–27 28–29 30–31 — 32–33 — 34–36 37–39 — — 40–41 42–43 44–45 46–47 — — — 48–49 50–51 52–53 54–55 56 — — 57–58 59–60 — 61 62–64 65–66 67–68 69–71 — 72–73 74–75 76–77 78–79  Page M36 M28 M31 M34 M36 M43 M43 M43 M28 D224 M29 M29 M29 M29 M29 M30 M30 M31 M31 M31 M32 D224 M32 M32 M32 M33 D224 M33 M33 M33 M34 D224 D224 D224 M35 M36 M36 M36 M37 M37 D225 D225 M38 M38 M38 M38 D225 D225 M39 M39 M39 M39 M40 M40 M40 M41 M41 M42 D225 M42 M42 M42  Item Name Illuminating Aquatic Changeling1 Everbright Hideaway Shadowstrike Sizing Slow burst Arcane might 2 Bane (roll on table in DMG) Berserker3 Binding Blessed Bloodfeeding Bloodstone Brash Brutal surge Chargebreaker Charging Corrosive Deadly precision Defending Defensive surge Dessicating Dislocator Dispelling Distance Divine wrath Dragondoom Dragonhunter Eager Flaming Frost Ghost touch Harmonizing Heavenly burst Hunting Illusion bane Impact 5 Impaling6 Keen7 Ki focus Knockback Lucky Magebane Maiming Merciful Mighty cleaving Mighty smiting Mindfeeder Morphing8 Paralyzing Power storing Precise Profane Psychokinetic Quick loading9 Resounding Returning Revealing Sacred Screaming  284  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 284  12/21/06 6:04:32 AM  D225 M43 M43 D225 M43 D225 M44 M44 M44 M44 M44 D226 D225 M45 D226 M46 M46 M46  Seeking Shattermantle Shielding10 Shock Soulbound Spell storing Spellstrike Stunning surge Stygian Sundering Sweeping Throwing Thundering Venomous Vicious Warning Weakening Whirling  Ranged d% — 01 02–04 05–06 07 08 09–10 11–12 13–15 — 16–17 18–19 20–21 22–23 24–26 27–28 — 29–30 31–33 34–36 — 37–38 39–40 41–45 — 46–48 — 49–51 52–56 57 58–60 — 61–63 64–65 66–67 68–69 70–71 72–73 74–75 76–77 78–79 80–82 83–88 89–91  Page M45 M38 M28 D223 M28 M28 D223 M28 M29 M29 M31 M31 M32 M32 M33 M33 D224 M33 M33 M34 M34 M34 M35 D224 M35 M35 M35 D225 D225 M36 M37 M38 M38 M39 M39 M40 M40 M41 M41 M41 M42 M42 D225 M44  Item Name Vanishing Manifester Acidic burst S Anarchic Aquan Auran Axiomatic Banishing Blindsighted Blurstrike Collision Consumptive Dessicating burst S Disarming Dislocator, great S Dispelling, greaterS Disruption5 Domineering Doom burst Energy aura Energy surgeS,4 Enervating Fiercebane S Flaming burst Fleshgrinding7 Force Ghost strike S Holy Icy burst Ignan Impedance Incorporeal bindingS Metalline Mindcrusher Paralytic burst Parrying Profane burst S Psibane Psychic Psychokinetic burst S Sacred burst S Screaming burst S Shocking burst StunningS  +2 Bonus Melee d% 01 02 03–04 05–06 07 08 09–10 11–12 13–14 15–16 17–18 19–20 21–22 23 24–25 26–27 28–29 30–31 32–33 34–35 36–37 38–39 40–41 42–44 45–46 — 47–48 49–51 52–54 55 56–57 58–59 60–61 62–63 64–65 66–67 68–69 70–71 72–73 74–75 76–77 78–79 80–83 84–86  87–88 89–91 92–93 94–95 96–98 99–100  92 93–96 97–98 — — 99–100  M45 M45 D226 M45 D226 —  Terran Transmuting Unholy Vampiric Wounding two +1 properties  Ranged d% 01–12 13–23 24–32 — — 33–45 — 46–53 54–59 60–64 65–78 — 79–89 90–100  Page M40 M30 M31 M34 M36 M37 M39 M43 M44 M44 D225 M45 M37 —  Item Name Prismatic burst Bodyfeeder Cursespewing Ethereal reaver Holy surgeS Implacable Necrotic focus Soulbound, greaterS SoulbreakerS SouldrinkingS Speed Unholy surge S Illusion theft S +2 property, +1 property  Ranged d% 01–31 — 32–61 62–82 83–100  Page D224 D224 — — —  Item Name Brilliant energy Dancing +3 property, +1 property +2 property, +2 property +2 property, two +1 properties  +3 Bonus Melee d% 01–09 10–17 18–25 26–32 33–39 40–47 48–54 55–57 58–61 62–66 67–76 77–84 85–92 93–100  APPENDIX 2  80–81 82–83 — 84–85 86 — 87 88–89 90–91 — — — 92–94 95–96 — 97–98 99–100 —  RANDOM TREASURES  — 79 80 81–83 84 85–87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 95 96–97 98 99 100  +4 Bonus Melee d% 01–19 20–41 42–64 65–83 84–100  +5 Bonus Melee Ranged d% d% Page Item Name 01–20 — D226 Vorpal11 21–40 01–38 — +4 property, +1 property 41–60 39–71 — +3 property, +2 property 61–80 72–91 — two +2 properties, +1 property 81–100 92–100 — +2 property, three +1 properties S Synergy items include the value of their synergy prerequisite properties. 1 Spears, shortspears, or longspears only. 2 Bows only (not crossbows). 3 Two-handed weapons only. 4 The DM chooses the type of energy for this item. 5 Bludgeoning weapons only. 6 Piercing weapons only. 7 Piercing or slashing weapons only. 8 Melee or thrown weapons only. 9 Crossbows only 10 Light weapons only. 11 Slashing weapons only.  285  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 285  12/21/06 6:04:34 AM  MAGIC ITEM RECORD SHEET MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  MAGIC ITEM  FACE  HEAD  Goggles, lenses, masks, spectacles, third eyes. MAGIC ITEM  Circlets, crowns, hats, headbands, helmets, phylacteries.  REFERENCE  T H R O AT  MAGIC ITEM  Amulets, badges, brooches, collars, medals, medallions, necklaces, pendants, periapts, scarabs, scarfs, torcs. MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  REFERENCE  SHOULDERS Capes, cloaks, mantles, shawls.  REFERENCE MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  BODY Armor, robes.  TORSO Shirts, tunics, vests, vestments.  MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  MAGIC ITEM  HANDS  REFERENCE  Gauntlets, gloves.  ARMS Armbands, bracelets, bracers. MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  WAIST  MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  MAGIC ITEM  REFERENCE  Belts, girdles, sashes.  MAGIC ITEM  RINGS  REFERENCE  FEET Boots, sandals, shoes, slippers.  WEAPONS, SHIELDS, AND OTHER ITEMS ____________________________________ ____________________________________ ____________________________________ ____________________________________ ____________________________________ ____________________________________ ____________________________________  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 286  ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________  ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________ ________________________________  12/21/06 6:04:36 AM  620_10762_ChpApp1.indd 288  12/21/06 6:04:38 AM  Magic Item Compendium Errata When the text within a product contradicts itself, our general policy is that the primary source (actual rules text) is correct and any secondary reference (such as a table or character's statistics block) is incorrect. Exceptions to the rule will be called out specifically.  Page 5 – Bane Blind [Substitution] The last sentence of the second paragraph should read: “On a result of Humanoid, the DM chooses the specific subtype that the armor affects.”  Page 11 – Fearsome [Omission] The end of the first paragraph is missing a statement. Add: “This is a mind-affecting effect.”  Page 13 – Menacing [Omission] The end of the first paragraph is missing a statement. Add: “This is a mind-affecting effect.”  The end of the first paragraph is missing a statement. It should read: “This is a mind-affecting effect.”  Page 34 – Everbright [Omission] The end of the first paragraph is missing a statement. It should read: “The wielder is not affect by the blinding ability.”  Page 34 – Everbright [Substitution] The cost to create is not correct. It should read: “Cost to Create: 1000 gp, 80 XP, 2 days”  Page 35 – Fleshgrinding [Substitution] The last sentence of the second paragraph needs a text fix. Here is the new text: “It will not returns to your hand if a creature other than you pulls the weapon free and still holds it.”  Page 39 – Morphing [Omission] Page 24 – Wrapped Tower [Revision] Replace the first paragraph of the item’s description with the following text. “Once per day while using this +1 tower shield to gain total cover (PH 125), you can activate its special property. At your command, the mere sight of the shield’s mummylike facade requires each viewer within 30 feet to succeed on a DC 16 Will save or be paralyzed with fear for 1d4 rounds. This is a mind-affecting effect. The wielder of the shield is immune to thi s effect.”  Page 27 – Hardness and Hit Points [Substitution] The first sentence of the subsection titled “Hardness and Hit Points” is in error. It should read: “Each +1 of enhancement bonus adds 2 to a weapon’s hardness and 10 to its hit points.”  Page 32 – Desiccating Burst [Omission] The first sentence of the second paragraph for the desiccating burst weapon ability is missing some text. It should read: In addition, the weapon explodes with a dehydrating blast on a successful critical hit, dealing extra damage to living creatures as set out in the table below.  Page 32 – Desiccating Burst [Revision]  This weapon property is missing a command subtype. It should read: “Activation: standard (command)”  Page 40 – Paralyzing [Revision] A minor qualifying revision has to be made to the first sentence of this power’s description. It should read: “When a paralyzing weapon is activated, the next time you hit a creature with the weapon before the end of your turn the target must succeed on a DC 17 Will save or be paralyzed.”  Page 40 – Prismatic Burst [Substitution] The cost to create is not correct. It should read: “Cost to Create: 15,000 gp, 1200 XP, 30 days”  Page 49 Cudgel the Never Forgets [Omission] The cudgel is missing its ego score. Add the following to second paragraph, first sentence, at the end of the parenthetical statistic block: “Ego score 12”  Page 68 – Amber Amulet of Vermin (table) [Substitution] The scorpion size is incorrect. The Vermin entry on line five should read: “Large monstrous scorpion.”  Disregard the last sentence of the second paragraph. The desiccating ability is always active.  Page 100 – Flesh Ring of Scorn [Substitution]  Page 33 – Domineering [Omission]  There is an activation for this item: “Activation: Immediate (mental)”  The end of the first paragraph is missing a statement. It should read: “This is a mind-affecting effect.”  Page 33 – Doom Burst [Omission]  Page 101 – Gauntlet of Gruumsh [Substitution] Change the first line to the following: “Three times per day, activate this +1 gauntlet to make a melee  touch attack that can blind a target creature for one hour (Fort DC 14 negates).”  Page 101 – Gauntlet of Gruumsh [Omission] The activation entry is missing its parenthetical. It should read: “Activation: Standard (mental)”  Page 103 – Gauntlets of Lassitude [Omission] The activation entry is missing its parenthetical. It should read: “Activation: Standard (mental)”  Page 101 – Gauntlets of Lassitude [Substitution] Change the first line to the following: “Three times per day, activate these gauntlets make a melee touch attack with them.”  Page 104 – Tabard of the Great Crusade [Revision] Clerics of St. Cuthbert can’t be evil. Change the second sentence of the first paragraph as follows: “When you wear one of these garments over armor, you and every ally within 20 feet gains a +1 morale bonus on saving throws, provided that you are lawful neutral, lawful good, or neutral.”  Page 156– Diamondskin Decanter [Omission] The “1 draught” subhead is missing a word. It should read: “1 draught: Damage reduction 2/adamantine, which last for 1 hour or until 20 points of damage has been prevented.”  Page 177—Runestaff of Cacophony [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,600 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,800 gp, 1024 XP, 26 days.  Page 177—Runestaff of Charming [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 6,600 gp (11th) Cost to Create: 3,300 gp, 264 XP, 7 days.  Page 177—Runestaff of Conjuration [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,400 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,700 gp, 1,016 XP, 26 days.  Page 177—Runestaff of Destruction [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 33,600 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 16,800 gp, 1,344 XP, 34 days.  Page 177—Runestaff of Destruction [Revision] Substitute earthquake with greater shout on the runestaff of destruction’s spell list and prerequisite list.  Page 177—Runestaff of Divination [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,400 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,700 gp, 1,016 XP, 24 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Earth and Stone [Substitution]  Page 168– Pipes of Frenzied Revelry [Omission]  Price (Item Level): 19,400 gp (15th) Cost to Create: 9,700 gp, 776 XP, 20 days.  Add the following sentence to the last paragraph of the “Relic Power” section: “The pipes confusion power does not affect the user.”  Page 178—Runestaff of Enchantment [Substitution]  Page 176—Runestaff of Abjuration [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,400 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,700 gp, 1,016 XP, 26 days.  Page 176—Runestaff of the Architect [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,200 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,600 gp, 1008 XP, 26 days.  Page 176—Runestaff of the Artisan [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 18,400 gp (15th) Cost to Create: 9,200 gp, 736 XP, 19 days.  Page 177—Runestaff of the Assassin [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 10,600 gp (13th) Cost to Create: 5,300 gp, 424 XP, 11 days.  Price (Item Level): 25,400 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,700 gp, 1016 XP, 26 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Entrapment [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 9,600 gp (12th) Cost to Create: 4,800 gp, 384 XP, 10 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Ethereal Action [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 29,700 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 14,850 gp, 1188 XP, 30 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Evocation [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,400 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,700 gp, 1016 XP, 26 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Eyes [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 9,000 gp (12th)  Cost to Create: 4,500 gp, 360 XP, 9 days.  Cost to Create: 29,650 gp, 2,372 XP, 60 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Eyes [Revision]  Page 181—Runestaff of Size Alteration [Substitution]  Substitute remove blindness/deafness with arcane sight on the runestaff of eye’s spell list and prerequisite list.  Price (Item Level): 11,800 gp (13th) Cost to Create: 5,900 gp, 472 XP, 12 days.  Page 178—Runestaff of Fiendish Darkness [Substitution]  Page 182—Runestaff of Time [Substitution]  Price (Item Level): 37,400 gp (17th) Cost to Create: 18,700 gp, 1496 XP, 38 days.  Price (Item Level): 47,200 gp (17th) Cost to Create: 23,600 gp, 1888 XP, 48 days.  Page 180—Runestaff of Forced Happiness [Substitution]  Page 182—Runestaff of Transmutation [Substitution]  Price (Item Level): 17,800 gp (14th) Cost to Create: 8,900 gp, 712 XP, 18 days.  Price (Item Level): 27,200 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 13,600 gp, 1088 XP, 28 days.  Page 180—Runestaff of Frost [Substitution]  Page 182—Runestaff of Transportation [Substitution]  Price (Item Level): 16,400 gp (14th) Cost to Create: 8,200 gp, 656 XP, 17 days.  Price (Item Level): 15,000 gp (14th) Cost to Create: 7,500 gp, 600 XP, 15 days.  Page 180—Runestaff of Illumination [Substitution]  Page 182—Runestaff of Undead Slayer [Substitution]  Price (Item Level): 27,800 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 13,900 gp, 1,112 XP, 28 days.  Price (Item Level): 26,800 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 13,400 gp, 1072 XP, 27 days.  Page 180—Runestaff of Illusion [Substitution]  Page 177—Runestaff of Undead Slayer [Revision]  Price (Item Level): 24,400 gp (15th) Cost to Create: 12,200 gp, 976 XP, 25 days.  Substitute deathward with forceward (SC 98), disrupting weapon with incorporeal nova (SC 121), and searing light with halt undead.  Page 180—Runestaff of Insanity [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 45,600 gp (17th) Cost to Create: 22,800 gp, 1824 XP, 46 days.  Page 180—Runestaff of Necromancy [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 25,400 gp (16th) Cost to Create: 12,700 gp, 1016 XP, 26 days.  Page 181—Runestaff of Night [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 12,400 gp (13th) Cost to Create: 6,200 gp, 96 XP, 13 days.  Page 181—Runestaff of Opening [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 11,800 gp (13th) Cost to Create: 5,900 gp, 472 XP, 12 days.  Page 181—Runestaff of Passage [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 60,200 gp (18th) Cost to Create: 30,100 gp, 2,480 XP, 61 days.  Page 181—Runestaff of Power [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 59,300 gp (18th)  Page 182—Runestaff of the Undying [Substitution] Price (Item Level): 17,600 gp (14th) Cost to Create: 8,800 gp, 704 XP, 18 days.  Page 196– Five Virtues Pieces and Abilities (sidebar) [Substitution] The armband of confrontation features the wrong level after the price. It should read: “1,400 gp (5th)”  Page 196– Five Virtues Pieces and Abilities (sidebar) [Substitution] The crystal of alacrity has misplaced information. The Body Slot and Ability sections should read: Body Slot -- (armor crystal)  Ability +5 ft. speed  Page 211 – Seven Veils Pieces and Abilities (sidebar) [Substitution] The serpent veil Body Slot entry is incorrect it should read: Body Slot Throat  Page 211 – Seven Veils Pieces and Abilities (sidebar) [Substitution] The turquoise veil Body Slot entry is incorrect it should read: “Body Slot Face”  Page 224 – Creating New Runestaffs [Revision] Delete the last sentence of the first paragraph. There are a number of runestaffs with spells lower than 3rd level.  Auras Errata A number of the magic items presented in the Magic Item Compendium do not follow the rule presented for determining the aura of the magic item. The following is a list of items and the corrected auras. Page 7 – Balance [Substitution]  Page 48 – Bow of Songs [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 49 – Chromatic Rod [Substitution] Aura: Divination/illusion  Aura: Divination  Page 49 – Cudgel that Never Forgets [Substitution]  Page 7 – Balance, Improved [Substitution]  Aura: Divination  Aura: Divination  Page 7 –Balance, Greater [Substitution] Aura: Divination  Page 14 – Soulbound [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 14 – Soulbound, Greater [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 26 – Crystal of Screening [Substitution]  Page 56 – Rod of Defiance [Substitution] Aura: Evocation  Page 63 – Water Whip [Substitution] Aura: Conjuration  Page 64 – Crystal of Energy Assault [Substitution] Aura: Conjuration or evocation (depending on the type of crystal)  Aura: Conjuration  Page 68 – Amulet of Aquatic Salvation [Substitution]  Page 26 – Iron Warf Diamond [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: Abjuration  Page 33 – Dragonhunter [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 68 – Amulet of Catapsi [Substitution] Aura: Abjuration  Page 34 – Eager [Substitution]  Page 69 – Amulet of Incarnum Shielding [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: None  Page 34 – Energy Aura [Substitution]  Page 69 – Amulet of Retributive Healing [Substitution]  Aura: Conjuration/evocation/transmutation  Aura: Conjuration  Page 35 – Ghost Strike [Substitution] Aura: Necromancy  Page 71 – Angelhelm [Substitution] Aura: Abjuration  Page 36 – Hunting [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 79 – Boots of Temporal Acceleration [Substitution]  Page 37 – Impact [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: Transmutation  Page 84 – Cape of the Viper [Substitution] Page 37 – Impaling [Substitution]  Aura: None  Aura: Divination  Page 85 – Charm of Countersong [Substitution] Page 38 – Knockback [Substitution]  Aura: None  Aura: Abjuration  Page 38 – Mage Bane [Substitution]  Page 86 – Chronocharm of the Uncaring Archmage [Substitution]  Aura: Abjuration  Aura: None  Page 38 – Manifester [Substitution]  Page 86 – Circlet of Rapid Casting [Substitution]  Aura: Evocation  Aura: None  Page 41 – Psibane [Substitution]  Page 86 – Circlet of Solace [Substitution]  Aura: Abjuration  Aura: Conjuration  Page 43 – Soulbound [Substitution]  Page 86 – Circlet of Wild Surging [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: None  Page 43 – Soulbound, Greater [Substitution]  Page 89 – Cloak of Turn Resistance [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: None  Page 90 – Contact Medallion [Substitution] Aura: Divination  Page 112 – Incarnum Focus [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 90 – Crystal Mask of Detection [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 115 – Mantle of Second Chances [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 90 – Crystal Mask of Discernment [Substitution]  Page 116 – Mask of Silent Trickery [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: Illusion  Page 91 – Crystal Mask of Dread [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 117 – Mindblade Gauntlet, Mindblade Gauntlet, Greater, and Mindblade Gantlet, Lesser [Substitution]  Page 91 – Crystal Mask of Insight [Substitution]  Aura: None  Aura: Transmutation  Page 91 – Crystal Mask of Knowledge [Substitution]  Page 117 –Mindblade Gauntlet, Greater [Substitution] Aura: None  Aura: Transmutation  Page 91 – Crystal Mask of Languages [Substitution]  Page 117 –Mindblade Gantlet, Lesser [Substitution] Aura: None  Aura: Transmutation  Page 119 – Platinum Helm [Substitution] Page 92 – Crystal Mask of Mindarmor [Substitution]  Aura: Divination  Aura: Abjuration  Page 119 – Psionatrix [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 92 – Crystal mask of Psionic Craft [Substitution]  Page 120 – Reliquary Holy Symbol [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: None  Page 95 – Dragon Spirit Amulet [Substitution]  Page 121 – Repelling Gauntlets [Substitution]  Aura: None  Aura: Evocation  Page 95 – Dragon Spirit Cincture [Substitution]  Page 123 – Ring of Forcewall [Substitution]  Aura: None  Aura: Evocation  Page 96 – Eagle Claw Talisman [Substitution]  Page 126 – Ring of Self-Sufficiency [Substitution]  Aura: Evocation  Aura: Transmutation  Page 97 – Essentia Helm [Substitution]  Page 129 – Robe of Arcane Might [Substitution]  Aura: None  Aura: Conjuration  Page 98 – Eyes of the Power Leech [Substitution]  Page 133 – Scry Shroud [Substitution]  Aura: Necromancy  Aura: Abjuration  Page 98 –Eyes of the Power Leech, Vampiric [Substitution]  Page 133 – Sepulchral Vest [Substitution]  Aura: None  Page 102 – Gauntlets of Eldritch Energy [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 103 – Gauntlets of Mindfire [Substitution]  Aura: Necromancy  Page 133 – Shiftweave [Substitution] Aura: Illusion  Page 134 – Shirt of Chains [Substitution] Aura: Abjuration  Aura: Necromancy  Page 134 – Shirt of the Fey [Substitution]  Page 105 – Gloves of Eldritch Admixture [Substitution]  Page 135 – Shirt of the Ironskin [Substitution]  Aura: Abjuration  Aura: Evocation or conjuration  Aura: Abjuration  Page 108 – Goggles of Lifesight [Substitution]  Page 135 – Shirt of the Moon [Substitution]  Aura: Necromancy  Page 110 – Heartseeking Amulet [Substitution] Aura: Divination  Aura: Abjuration  Page 135 Shirt of Resilience [Substitution] Aura: Abjuration  Page 136 – Shirt of the Treant [Substitution]  Page 157 – Dragondoom Scepter [Substitution]  Aura: Abjuration  Aura: None  Page 136 – SilkSlick Belt [Substitution]  Page 161 – Glyph Seed and Glyph Seed, Greater [Substitution]  Aura: Conjuration  Aura: Abjuration  Page 136 – Soulsmite Gauntlets [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 161 –Glyph Seed, Greater [Substitution] Aura: Abjuration  Page 137 – Spare Hands [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 163 – Magic Beadroll [Substitution] Aura: Conjuration, abjuration  Page 140 – Third Eye Aware [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 164 – Map of Unseen Lands [Substitution] Aura: Divination  Page 141 – Third Eye Conceal [Substitution] Aura: Abjuration  Page 164 – Memento Magica [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 141 – Third Eye Gather [Substitution] Aura: Transmutation  Page 165 – Metamagic Rod (Reach) [Substitution] Aura: None  Page 143 – Third Eye Surge [Substitution] Aura: Divination  Page 151 – Bag of Flames [Substitution]  Page 183 – Scepter of the Netherworld [Substitution] Aura: None  Aura: Abjuration  Page 153 – Camouflage Paint [Substitution]  Page 183 – Scroll of Uncertain Provenance [Substitution]  Aura: Illusion  Aura: Conjuration  Page 154 – Cognizance Crystal [Substitution]  Page 209 – Crown of Flames [Substitution]  Aura: None  Page 156 – Domain Draught [Substitution] Aura: None  Aura: Evocation  Page 214 – Badge of Glory [Substitution] Aura: Evocation  Page 157 – Dragon’s Draught [Substitution]  Page 215 – Ephod of Authority [Substitution]  Aura: Transmutation  Aura: None  
