INTRODUCTION  Maho-Tsukai (Oriental Adventures): The maho-tsukai’s spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. When adding spells to the maho-tsukai’s spell list, add mainly spells with the evil descriptor. Mortal Hunter (Book of Vile Darkness): The mortal hunters’s spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. Examine the assassin, blackguard, and ranger spells in this book for likely additions to the mortal hunter’s spell list. Prime Underdark Guide (Underdark): The prime Underdark guide’s spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. When adding to the spell list, look for spells that emphasize survival and exploration. Spellthief (Complete Adventurer): The spellthief can learn sorcerer/wizard spells from several speciﬁc schools. Thus, spells in this book from those schools are available to a spellthief to learn. Shaman (Oriental Adventures): Shamans have a spell list that is a blend of druid and cleric, but they should not get all the spells clerics and druids do. Examine the spell lists of both those classes for good choices. Also, consider using the cleric domains presented in this book as shaman domains. Shugenja (Complete Divine): Add spells with strong elemental or weather themes. The druid spell list is a good place to look. Sohei (Oriental Adventures): The sohei spell list is intentionally narrow. Carefully consider the consequences of expanding the list. If you choose to do so, add spells that deal with personal protection and martial ability. Warmage (Miniatures Handbook): Expanding the warmage spell list isn’t recommended. The warmage has a limited list of spells to balance its power and adding spells might tip that balance. If you’d like to add to the list anyway, try replacing access to spells rather than simply giving the warmage a wider range of spells to choose from. Of course, when a warmage gains the advanced learning class feature, the evocation spells in this book offer many options. Wu Jen (Complete Arcane): Add spells with element (except air), wood, and metal themes.  WHAT YOU NEED TO PLAY  Spell Compendium makes use of the information in the three D&Dcorebooks—Player’sHandbook,DungeonMaster’sGuide,  and Monster Manual. Other books might increase your enjoyment of this product, most notably Complete Arcane and Complete Divine, but they are not strictly necessary.  SWIFT AND IMMEDIATE ACTIONS  Some spells in this book have a casting time of “1 swift action” or “1 immediate action.” These action types, not described in the core rulebooks, are deﬁned and explained below. Swift Action: A swift action consumes a very small amount of time, but represents a larger expenditure of effort and energy than a free action. You can perform one swift action per turn without affecting your ability to perform other actions. In that regard, a swift action is like a free action. However, you can perform only a single swift action per turn, regardless of what other actions you take. You can take a swift action any time you would normally be allowed to take a free action. Casting a quickened spell is a swift action (instead of a free action, as stated in the Quicken Spell feat description in the Player’s Handbook). Casting a spell with a casting time of 1 swift action does not provoke attacks of opportunity. Immediate Action: Much like a swift action, an immediate action consumes a very small amount of time, but represents a larger expenditure of effort and energy than a free action. However, unlike a swift action, an immediate action can be performed at any time—even if it’s not your turn. Casting feather fall is an immediate action (instead of a free action, as stated in the spell description in the Player’s Handbook), since the spell can be cast at any time. Using an immediate action on your turn is the same as using a swift action, and counts as your swift action for that turn. You cannot use another immediate action or a swift action until after your next turn if you have used an immediate action when it is not currently your turn. You also cannot use an immediate action if you are currently ﬂat-footed. Magic Items: Activating a spell completion item, activating a spell trigger item, or drinking a potion is a standard action even if the spell from which the scroll, potion, or item is made can be cast as a swift action. In other words, it takes a standard action to drink a potion of quick march(page 164), even though casting the spell itself requires only a swift action. SOURCES  4  This book includes spells from many sources, including Dragon magazine, web articles previously published on the Wizards of the Coast website, and supplements such as Complete Arcane and Manual of the Planes. Most of the spells are presented with little change, but some material has been revised to v.3.5 based on feedback from thousands of D&D players comparing and debating the strengths and weaknesses of spells at gaming conventions, on message boards, on email lists, and over the counters of their friendly local gaming stores. We hope you like the changes we made to some of these spells. If you have been playing with a spell we’ve picked up and re-  vised for this book, you should strongly consider updating your character or campaign to the new version. The simplest way to do this is simply offer a “mulligan” to any character who needs tweaking. It’s pretty easy to note that a spell has a different duration or that another class can now cast the spell. Most of the changes we made to previously published material we made to create an improved version of that material—to help out spells that were formerly suboptimal choices, to adjust spells that were simply too good, or take whatever steps the D&D 3.5 revision made necessary. Of course, if you’re playing with older material and it’s working fine in your game, you shouldn’t feel compelled to change. It’s your game, after all.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS Illus. by D. Martin  The spells herein are presented in alphabetical order (with the exception of those whose names begin with “greater,” “lesser,” “mass,” “superior,” “swift,” or “ﬁnal”; see Order of Presentation, PH 181). For explanation of spell terminology, see Chapter 10 of the Player’s Handbook.  RENAMED SPELLS  The following spells were renamed before their inclusion in this book. If you look for a particular spell in this chapter and don’t ﬁnd it, check this list to see if the spell has a new name. Previous Name Aganazzar’s scorcher air bubble Alamanther’s return analyze opponent assay resistance Auril’s ﬂowers Azuth’s exalted triad Azuth’s spell shield Balagarn’s iron horn bane bow Barlen’s crabwalk Bigby’s slapping hand  Present Name scorch deep breath replicate casting know opponent assay spell resistance ice ﬂowers triadspell mass spell resistance ironthunder horn foebane crabwalk slapping hand  bridge of sound Caligarde’s claw chamber chameleon claws of the beast climb curse of petty failing curse of petty failing, legion’s Darsson’s potion deafening breath  dark way force claw ethereal chamber camouﬂage claws of the bear climb walls curse of ill fortune mass curse of ill fortune quick potion incorporated into breath weapon admixture Dhulark’s glassstrike glass strike Eilistraee’s grace grace Elminster’s effulgent epuration effulgent epuration Elminster’s evasion instant refuge favor of Ilmater favor of the martyr force ram battering ram force whip sonic whip frost ﬁngers frost breath fugue of Tvash-Prull fugue gate seal seal portal Ghorus Toth’s metal melt metal melt great shout incorporated into greater shout green oath plant body Grimwald’s greymantle greymantle guided arrow guided shot hand of Torm hand of the faithful  5  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  harmony Horizikaul’s boom Horizikaul’s cough Horizikaul’s versatile vibration Igedrazaar’s miasma improved alarm ironguard, greater Kaupaer’s skittish nerves Kelemvor’s grace Khelben’s suspended silence Laeral’s cutting hand Laogzed’s breath Leomund’s hidden lodge manifest, mass Mestil’s acid breath Mestil’s acid sheath minor reﬂection minor servitor monstrous regeneration Mordenkainen’s buzzing bee Mordenkainen’s force missiles Mystra’s miasma Nchaser’s glowing orb Nybor’s gentle reminder Nybor’s mild admonishment Nybor’s stern reproof Nybor’s wrathful castigation  inspirational boost sonic blast sonic snap sonic rumble malevolent miasma greater alarm ironguard nerveskitter life’s grace suspended silence cutting hand nauseating breath hidden lodge mass make manifest acid breath acid sheath ray deﬂection awaken construct greater vigor buzzing bee force missiles magic miasma glowing orb rebuke greater rebuke rebuke, ﬁnal wrathful castigation  Otiluke’s dispelling screen Otiluke’s greater disp. screen Presper’s moonbow Rary’s interplanar telep. bond recall spirit remedy moderate wounds righteous fury  dispelling screen greater dispelling screen moonbow interplanar telepathic bond revenance vigor The version of this spell from the Minatures Handbook has been renamed rhino’s rush rogue wave tidal surge Shelgarn’s persistent blade persistent blade Simbul’s skeletal deliquescence corporeal instability Simbul’s spell sequencer spell matrix Simbul’s spell trigger greater spell matrix Simbul’s spell matrix lesser spell matrix Simbul’s synostodweomer synostodweomer Snilloc’s snowball swarm snowball swarm teleport, mass incorporated into teleport Tenser’s ﬂoating disk, greater greater ﬂoating disk Tirumel’s energy spheres energy spheres Tvash-Prull’s boneﬁddle boneﬁddle undeniable gravity earthbind Vaeraun’s nightshield nightshield Zajimarn’s avalanche obedient avalanche Zajimarn’s ice claw prison ice claw  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS ABSORB WEAPON  Transmutation Level: Assassin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: One touched weapon not in another creature’s possession Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (object); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (object) The weapon you hold in your hand begins to fade from existence as you complete the spell. With the last words of the spell it disappearscompletely.Atthesamemoment, a weapon-shaped red blotch appears on your arm. You can harmlessly absorb a weapon you are touching (even a poisoned one) into your arm, as long as it is not in another creature’s possession. The weapon must be a light weapon for you at the time you cast the spell. The absorbed weapon cannot be felt under the skin and doesn’t restrict your range of motion in any way. An absorbed  6  weapon cannot be detected with even a careful search, although detect magic reveals the presence of a magical aura. The only evidence of its presence is a faint blotch on your skin shaped vaguely like the weapon. When you touch the spot (an action equivalent to drawing a weapon), or when the spell duration expires, the weapon appears in your hand and the spell ends. If you attack with the weapon in the same round that you retrieve it from its hiding place, you can attempt a Bluff check to feint in combat as a free action, and you gain a +4 bonus on the Bluff check. An intelligent magic weapon gets a saving throw against this spell, but other weapons do not.  ABSORPTION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Until expended or 10 minutes/level  Asyoucompletethespell’sintricategestures, you detect a slight buzz at the edge of your hearing. Your body feels warmer, and a feeling of security ﬁlls you. Spells and spell-like effects that target you are absorbed, their energy stored to power spells of your own. Absorption absorbs only ranged spells that have you as a target. Touch spells, effect spells, and area spells that affect you cannot be absorbed. Once the spell is cast, you can absorb 1d4+6 spell levels (rolled secretly by the DM). The level of each spell you absorb is subtracted from the total. If a spell is only partially absorbed (because its level exceeds the number of levels remaining to be absorbed), divide the number of spell levels left unabsorbed by the original spell level. For spells that deal damage, use the result to determine what fraction of the damage you take. For spells that create effects, use the result as a percentage chance to be affected. For example, you have three spell levels of absorption remaining and are struck by dominate person cast as a 5th-  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Evil] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You complete the spell and a hot fog rises from the ground, coiling round you. Stepping out of the billowing steam comes a handfulofsquat,blubberydemons.Other, greater silhouettes loom behind them, answering your call. This spell summons a pack of demons from the Inﬁnite Layers of the Abyss to serve you. When the spell is complete, 2d4 dretches (MM 42) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 babau demons (MM 40) appear. Ten minutes after that, one vrock demon (MM 48) appears. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell. The demons obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else  ACCELERATED MOVEMENT  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) An azure glow surrounds you as you completethemotionsthatunleashthespell.You immediately feel lighter of foot. While this spell is in effect, you can move at your normal speed when using Balance, Climb, Hide, Move Silently, and Tumble without taking any penalty on your check. This spell does not affect the penalty for using these skills while running or charging. Material Component: A dead cockroach.  ACID BREATH  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 15 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes You pop the ﬁre ants into your mouth and exhalequickly.Theantsdistillintodropsof pureacidinmidair,spatteringagainstyour foes and leaving smoking holes. You breathe forth a cone of acidic droplets. The cone deals 1d6 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 10d6). Material Component: A handful of ﬁre ants (alive or dead).  ACID SHEATH  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M, F  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Youcrushtheﬁreantsbetweenyourﬁngers and rub the smashed mixture over your exposed ﬂesh. The smashed ants liquefy, and the liquid covers your body in a thick, translucent sheath. You enclose yourself in a ﬂuid sheath of acid that does not harm you. You can breathe normally and cast spells while the acid sheath is present. Any creature striking you deals normal damage, but at the same time the attacker takes 2 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 30 points). Reach weapons, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in this way. The acid sheath does not protect you against other attack forms, such as ﬁre. If you are in a grapple, other creatures in the grapple takes acid damage once per round at the beginning of their turn. Any spell you cast with the acid descriptor while the sheath surrounds you deals an extra 1 point of damage per die. Material Component: A handful of ﬁre ants (alive or dead). Focus: A glass sculpture of a humanoid (worth 50 gp).  CHAPTER 1  ABYSSAL ARMY  manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the demons. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  level spell. Absorption absorbs three levels of the spell, resulting in a 40% chance (2/5) that you will be affected normally. If affected, any saving throw the spell allows you still applies. Likewise, if you’re struck by disintegrate cast as a 6th-level spell with four levels of absorption remaining, two levels of the spell remain, and you take only 33% (1/3) of the damage you would normally take from the spell. You can use captured spell energy to cast any spell you know or have prepared, but spells so cast don’t disappear from your list of prepared spells or count against the number of spells you can normally cast per day (so you so must keep a running total of spell levels absorbed and used). The levels of spell energy you have stored must be equal to or greater than the level of the spell you want to cast, and you must have at hand (and expend) any material components required for the spell.  ACID STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No Adarkgreencloudwhirlsintobeingbefore unleashing a shower of foul-smelling, yellow-green rain. Acid rain deals 1d6 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to each creature in the area. Material Component: A ﬂask of acid (10 gp).  7  AID, MASS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One or more creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Youholdyourholysymbolaloftandcastthe spell. A silvery radiance dances from your hands, leaping over all the nearby party members and strengthening them. This spell functions like aid (PH 196), except that it affects multiple subjects at a distance and each subject gains temporary hit points equal to 1d8 + caster level (to a maximum of 1d8+15).  Illus. by W. Reynolds  AIMING AT THE TARGET  8  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: S Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Concentration, up to 20 minutes; see text  When you cast this spell, you increase your ability to concentrate on a spell you have already cast. You can cast this spell while maintaining concentration on another spell. Aiming at the target gives you a +10 circumstance bonus on Concentration checks you make to maintain concentration on the other spell, and its effect lasts as long as you concentrate on the other spell (to a maximum of 20 minutes).  AIR BREATHING  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creatures touched Duration: 2 hours/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Tiny bubbles form on your hands as you completethespell.Asyoutoucheachsubject, itschestheavesandshudders,thenbeginsto rhythmically expand and contract.  As you intone the words of power to release this spell, you feel far more focused on the spellonwhich you have been concentrating.  Nebin surprises the trolls with acid breath  The transmuted creatures can breathe air freely. Divide the duration evenly among all the creatures you touch. This spell does not make creatures unable to breathe water. Arcane Material Component: A short reed or piece of straw.  ALARM, GREATER  Abjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Duration: 4 hours/level (D) Uttering a low chant, you ring a crystal bellwiththedrummingofyourﬁngernails, bringing into being an invisible warded area. This spell functions like alarm (PH 197), and in addition the spell works on creatures traveling through the area on coterminous or coexistent planes (DMG 150), such the Ethereal Plane and the Plane of Shadow. Focus: A bell made of carved crystal, worth at least 100 gp.  ALIGN FANG  Align fang makes a creature’s natural weapons good-, evil-, lawful-, or chaotic-aligned, as you choose. A natural weapon that is aligned can overcome the damage reduction of certain creatures, usually outsiders of the opposite alignment. This spell has no effect on a natural weapon that is already treated as being aligned, such as the claw or bite attack of most demons. You can’t cast this spell on a manufactured weapon, such as a sword. When you cast this spell to make a natural weapon good-, evil-, lawful-, or chaotic-aligned, align fang is a good, evil, lawful, or chaotic spell, respectively.  ALIGN FANG, MASS  Transmutation [see text] Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart You hold a sprig of mistletoe aloft and invoke the powers of nature. Your animal allies glow pale blue at their muzzles and paws. This spell functions like align fang, except that it affects multiple allies at a distance.  ALIGN WEAPON, MASS  Transmutation [see text] Level: Cleric 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One weapon/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  ALLEGRO  Transmutation Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) With a quick wiggle of your ﬁngers and a fewarcanewords,youreleasethefeatherin your hand to complete the spell. Suddenly, translucentbluemotesburstoutwardfrom youandcollectonyourselfandyournearby allies before fading away. Each creature within the spell’s area gains a 30-foot enhancement bonus to its land speed, up to a maximum of double the creature’s land speed. Affected creatures retain these effects for the duration of the spell, even if they leave the original area. Material Component: A tail feather from a bird of prey.  AMANUENSIS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 0, sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Object or objects with writing Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You point at the writing and then move your hand as though holding a stylus or quill. As you intone the spell, the script appears on a sheet of paper close at hand. You cause writing from one source (such as a book) to be copied into a book, paper, or parchment. This spell copies 250 words per minute and cre-  CHAPTER 1  You kneel beside your animal companion andpressasprigofmistletoeagainstitsforehead, calling upon the power of nature.  This spell functions like align weapon (PH 197), except that it affects multiple weapons or projectiles at a distance.  ates a perfect duplicate of the original. The spell copies only nonmagical text, not illustrations or magical writings (such as the text of a spellbook, a spell scroll, or a sepia snake sigil). If the target contains normal and magical writing (such as a letter with explosive runes), only the normal text is copied, leaving blank space in the copied text where the magical writing would be expected. Likewise, if the target contains text and illustration, only the text is copied. The spell triggers (but does not copy) writing-based magic traps in the material being copied. Blank paper, parchment, or a book must be provided for the spell to write upon. If the target has multiple pages, the spell automatically turns to the next blank page whenever necessary. If more pages in the target exist than blank pages are available, the spell copies the original until it runs out of blank pages. At any time during the spell’s duration you can redirect the magic to copy from another target, copy onto a different blank source, or resume a duplication that was interrupted by a shortfall of blank pages. The spell does not translate the copied writing. If you do not understand the original, you have no additional ability to understand the copy.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation [see text] Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You hold your holy symbol high and speak old words of power. Your party’s weapons take on a pale blue radiance.  AMORPHOUS FORM  Transmutation Level: Assassin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing corporeal creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You dust your ally with gelatin and silently evokethespell.Immediatelyherbonesbegin tosoftenandsheandherbelongingsslump, becoming malleable ooze. The subject and all its gear become amorphous and oozelike. This new form is boneless and ﬂuid, enabling the subject to pass through holes or narrow openings as small as 2 inches in diameter. While amorphous, the subject is immune to poison, polymorphing, and stunning, it cannot be ﬂanked, and it is  9  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  not subject to extra damage from critical hits. It gains a swim speed (if it does not have one already) equal to its land speed. The subject can remain submerged as long as desired without breathing. The subject’s armor (including natural armor) becomes worthless, though its modiﬁers for size, Dexterity, and deﬂection still apply to Armor Class, as do armor bonuses from force effects (for example, from the mage armor spell). While amorphous, the subject can’t attack or cast spells that require verbal, somatic, material, or focus components. (This limitation does not rule out the casting of any spells that the subject might have prepared using the metamagic feats Eschew Materials, Silent Spell, and Still Spell.) The subject loses all supernatural abilities while in amorphous form, and its magic items, aside from those bonuses noted above, cease functioning as long as it remains amorphous. Material Component: A pinch of gelatin.  You need to hear what’s going on. A hand motionortwo,andthevoicesbecomelouder to your ears. You cause an ampliﬁcation of all sounds within the spell’s area. This decreases the DC to hear those sounds by 20. Those creatures within the spell’s area do not notice the increased ampliﬁcation. Thus, anyone whose voice is ampliﬁed remains unaware of the increase in volume. The spell can be centered on a creature, and the effect then radiates from the creature and moves as it moves.  You can tell whether an area contains a magical portal or the effect of a gate spell. If you study an area for 1 round, you know the sizes and locations of any such portals in the area. Once you ﬁnd a portal, you can study it. (If you ﬁnd more than one portal, you can study only one at a time.) Each round you study a portal, you can discover one property of the portal, in this order. • Any key or command word needed to activate the portal. • Any special circumstances governing the portal’s use (such as speciﬁc times when it can be activated). • Whether the portal is one-way or two-way. • A glimpse of the area where the portal leads. You can look at the area where the portal leads for 1 round; the range of your vision is the spell’s range. Analyze portal does not allow other divination spells or spell-like abilities to extend through the portal. For example, you cannot also use detect magic or detect evil to study the area where the portal leads while viewing the area with analyze portal.  AMPLIFY  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or point in space Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes; see text  10  An unwilling creature can attempt a Will save to negate the spell and can apply spell resistance, if any. Items in a creature’s possession receive the beneﬁts of saves and spell resistance, but unattended objects and points in space do not. Amplify counters and dispels silence, and is also countered and dispelled by silence.  Gaining the beneﬁts of the amorphous body spell can be disconcerting  ANALYZE PORTAL  Divination Level: Bard 3, Portal 2, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation from you to the extreme of the range Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No Seeing with a magic eye, you sense the portal. Studying it, knowledge about the portal comes into your mind as though it was a memory you could not recall until now.  For each property, you make a caster level check (1d20 + caster level) against DC 17. If fail, you can try again in the next round. Analyze portal has only a limited ability to reveal unusual properties, as follows. • Random Portals: The spell reveals only that the portal is random and whether it can be activated now. It does not reveal when the portal starts or stops functioning. • Variable Portals: The spell reveals only that the portal is variable. If you study the portal’s destination, the spell reveals only the destination to which the portal is currently set. • Creature-Only Portals: The spell reveals this property. If you study the portal’s destination, the spell reveals where the portal sends creatures. If it is the kind of portal that sends creatures to one place and their equipment to another place, the spell does not reveal where the equipment goes.  • Malfunctioning Portals: The spell reveals only that the portal is malfunctioning, not what sort of malfunction the portal produces. Material Components: A crystal lens and a small mirror.  ANARCHIC STORM  The downpour created by this spell falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages lawful creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (lawful outsiders take double damage). In addition, each round, a bolt of lightning strikes a randomly selected lawful outsider within the spell’s area, dealing 5d6 points of electricity damage. After the spell’s duration expires, the water disappears. Material Component: A ﬂask of anarchic water (see the anarchic water spell, below).  ANARCHIC WATER  Transmutation [Chaotic] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Flask of water touched Duration: Instantaneous  This transmutation imbues a ﬂask (1 pint) of water with the energy of chaos, turning it into anarchic water. Anarchic water damages lawful outsiders the way holy water damages undead and evil outsiders. A ﬂask of anarchic water can be thrown as a splash weapon. Treat this attack as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 10 feet. A ﬂask breaks if thrown against the body of a corporeal creature, but to use it against an incorporeal creature, the bearer must open the ﬂask and pour the anarchic water out onto the target. Thus, a character can douse an incorporeal creature with anarchic water only if he is adjacent to it. Doing so is a ranged touch attack that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. A direct hit by a ﬂask of anarchic water deals 2d4 points of damage to a lawful outsider. Each such creature within 5 feet of the point where the ﬂask hits takes 1 point of damage from the splash. MaterialComponent: 5pounds ofpowdered iron and silver (worth 25 gp).  ANGELSKIN  Abjuration [Good] Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Lawful good creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your ally with the holy symbol andinvoketheblessedwords.Anopalescent glow spreads across her skin, imbuing it with a pearl-like sheen. The subject gains damage reduction 5/evil.  Evocation [Light] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 feet Area: All sighted creatures within a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Your body explodes with radiance that bathes the area around you in sunlight.  CHAPTER 1  You call upon the powers of chaos, and a heavy rain begins to fall around you, its drops a rainbow of soft radiances. Above you, a multicolored lightning bolt ﬂashes.  You speak the ancient, slippery words as you pour the iron and silver into the ﬂask. Despite the fact that there is more powder than room in the bottle, all of it dissolves, leaving a ﬂask of water swirling with motes of gold.  ANGER OF THE NOONDAY SUN  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Conjuration (Creation) [Chaotic, Water] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  Any creature within the area of the spell that can see you must make a saving throw or be temporarily blinded. The blindness lasts for 1 minute per caster level. An undead creature caught within the spell’s area takes 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6), or half damage if a Reﬂex save is successful. In addition, the beam results in the destruction of any undead creature speciﬁcally harmed by bright light (such as a vampire) if it fails its save. The ultraviolet light generated by the spell deals damage to fungi, mold, oozes, and slimes as if they were undead creatures.  ANIMATE BREATH  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round/level You exhale a ﬂaming tongue of ﬁre, but instead of lashing out against your foes, it produces a creature made of ﬂames that answers to your bidding. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you imbue the energy of your breath weapon with coherence, mobility, and a semblance of life. The  11  Illus. by F. Hooper  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Animate breath gives a lone dragon a powerful ally  animated breath then attacks whomever or whatever you designate. The spell works only on breath weapons that deal energy (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic) damage. The animated breath uses the statistics of a Huge ﬁre elemental (MM 99), with the following exceptions. • The creature’s subtype changes to match the energy damage dealt by the breath weapon. • The creature deals 2d8 points of damage of the same type as the breath weapon with each successful slam attack, instead of 2d8 points of ﬁre. • The creature has immunity to its own energy type, but no vulnerability to another energy type. • The creature does not have the burn ability.  12  ANIMATE FIRE  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One Small ﬁre Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By casting the mixture in your hand at the ﬁre, you complete the spell. Immediately thereafter, a part of the ﬂame coalesces into a vaguely humanoid shape more solid looking than the rest. You animate a ﬁre, which must be approximately the size of a campﬁre. The animated ﬁre has the statistics of a Small ﬁre elemental (MM 98), and attacks as you direct. It cannot move beyond the range of its source ﬁre (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels).  Material Component: A handful of charcoal, sulfur, and soda ash.  ANIMATE SNOW  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: Cube of snow up to 20 ft. on a side Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Nearby snow rapidly draws together with anaudiblecrunch,coalescingintoavaguely human-shaped form. You cause snow in the area to become 1d3+2 Large animated objects, 1d3 Huge animated objects, or one Gargantuan animated object (MM 14). The animated snow attacks as directed by your vocal commands.  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 1 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Cube of water up to 5 ft. on a side You indicate a patch of water with a hand shaking from pent-up divine spell power, and the liquid rises into a vaguely humanoid shape. This spell functions like animate ﬁre, but you can instead animate a quantity of water of at least 4 cubic feet into a Small water elemental (MM 100). Material Component: A vial of pure spring water mixed with cinnabar oil.  ANIMATE WOOD  Transmutation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: One Small or smaller wooden object Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By touching a piece of wood you release the energy of the spell into it. The wood beginstowritheandtwistbeforeyoureyes and then rises to move in the direction you indicate. This spell imbues a Small or smaller wooden object with mobility and a semblance of life, then causes it to immediately attack whomever or whatever you initially designate. Statistics for the animated wood are as for a Small animated object (MM 13). Wooden  ANTICIPATE TELEPORTATION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: One willing creature touched Area: 5-ft./level radius emanation from touched creature Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The arcane words that activate this spell linger in the air for a moment. As they fade from your hearing, you become more aware of both your surroundings and the possibility of intrusion. The subject of the spell is surrounded with an invisible aura that anticipates and delays the teleportation of any creature into the spell’s area. Any teleportation spell or effect (including all spells with the teleportation descriptor) can be anticipated, making the spell’s recipient instantly aware of the exact location where the teleporting creature will arrive (subject to the restrictions below), the creature’s size, and how many other creatures (and their sizes) are arriving with the teleporting creature. The spell also delays the arrival of the teleporting creature by 1 round (so that it arrives on its initiative count immediately before its next turn), generally giving the recipient of the spell and anyone else made aware of the information 1 round to act or ready actions. The teleporting creature does not perceive this delay. Since a teleporting creature doesn’t necessarily arrive at the precise location it intends, the spell also functions against a creature that arrives in range even though its intended destination was elsewhere. For a creature that intends to teleport into range but inadvertently arrives outside the spell’s area, the spell gives the recipient awareness  that a creature has attempted to teleport into range and delays the creature as normal, but doesn’t give any awareness as to the actual location of its imminent arrival. The spell has no effect on creatures attempting to teleport away from the spell’s area, although if their destination is within the area, the spell will affect their reentry as normal. Focus: A tiny hourglass of platinum and crystal costing at least 500 gp, which must be carried or worn by the spell’s recipient while the spell is in effect.  ANTICIPATE TELEPORTATION, GREATER  CHAPTER 1  ANIMATE WATER  objects animated by this spell have hardness 5. The spell cannot animate objects carried or worn by a creature. Material Component: A mixture of powdered cinnabar and ground peach pit.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Animated snow does not have a hardness score. It possesses improved speed as if it had legs, granting it a speed of 30 feet, as well as the blind special ability (MM 13). In addition, each animated snow object has the cold subtype and deals an extra 1d6 points of cold damage on a successful hit. Animated snow objects take 1d6 points of damage per round in a place where the temperature is above freezing.  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6  This spell functions like anticipate teleportation, except that greater anticipate teleportation identiﬁes the type of the arriving creature (and any companions accompanying it) and creates a delay of 3 rounds, providing the recipient with even more warning and preparation time. Focus: A tiny hourglass of platinum and crystal ﬁlled with diamond dust, costing at least 1,000 gp. The hourglass must be carried or worn by the spell’s recipient while the spell is in effect.  ANTICOLD SPHERE  Abjuration [Cold] Level: Druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes As a rosy color ﬂickers into being in the surroundingair,youfeelasenseofwarmth and well-being. All creatures within the area of the spell gain immunity to cold damage. In addition, the emanation prevents the entrance of any creature with the cold subtype. The effect hedges out such creatures in the area when it is cast.  13  Note: Forcing an abjuration barrier against creatures that the spell keeps at bay collapses the barrier (PH 172).  As you cast this spell, an invisible ray projects from your ﬁngers. Where it strikesyourfoe,itripplesacrosshis body,likewaterspreadingacross a calm pond.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ANTIDRAGON AURA  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The target, if struck, functions as if it were inside an antimagic ﬁeld (PH 200) if it fails its Will save. If this spell is used against a creature, the subject can’t cast spells or use supernatural or spell-like abilities, nor do such abilities have any effect on the creature. However, the creature can still use spell completion items (such as scrolls) or spell trigger items (such as wands), even though it can’t cast the spells required. If this spell is used against an object, that object’s magical powers are suppressed—including any spells previously cast and currently in effect on the item, as well as any spells or magical effects targeted on the object during the antimagic ray’s duration. The spell doesn’t affect any objects other than the subject itself, even if those objects are worn, carried by, or in contact with the subject. For instance, if a creature is the target, its equipment remains unaffected. Material Component: A pinch of iron ﬁlings mixed with ruby dust worth 100 gp.  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/ 2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youunleashthepowerofthisspelland thenuggetofplatinumvanishesfrom your palm. Your companions are bathed in a white aura with a silver scale pattern overlaid upon it. All subjects gain a +2 luck bonus to Armor Class and on saving throws against the attacks, spells, and special attacks (extraordinary, supernatural, and spell-like) of dragons. This bonus increases by 1 for every four caster levels above 5th (to +3 at 9th, +4 at 13th, and a maximum of +5 at 17th). Material Component: A chunk of platinum worth at least 25 gp (slightly less than 1 ounce).  ANTIMAGIC RAY Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes  14  ANYSPELL  The gestures for casting arc of lightning . . .  Transmutation Level: Spell 3 Components: V, S, DF (and possibly M, F, and XP) Casting Time: 15 minutes Range: Personal Target: You Du ration: Instantaneous  Although there is no visible effect from thisspellcasting,youchanneldivinepower through your mind, shaping and transforming this energy into the potential to cast one arcane spell.  Transmutation Level: Spell 6  This spell functions like anyspell, except you can read and prepare any arcane spell of up to 5th level, and the prepared spell occupies your 6th-level domain spell slot.  APPRAISING TOUCH  Divination Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  ARC OF LIGHTNING  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 5, Windstorm 5 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: A line between two creatures Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No Static ﬁlls the air as you complete the spell. With a gesture you create magical conductivitybetweentwocreatures,anda boltofelectricityarcsbetweenthemwitha shockingly loud crackle. This bolt deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to both creatures and to anything in the line between them. Both creatures must be in range, and you must be able to target them both (as if this spell had them as its targets). Draw the line from any corner in one creature’s space to any corner in the other’s space. The bolt affects all squares in this line. Arcane Material Component: Two small iron rods.  Abjuration [Darkness] Level: Darkness 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The spell envelops the creature in a shroud of ﬂickering shadows. The shroud grants the subject a +4 deﬂection bonus to Armor Class plus an additional +1 for every three caster levels above 7th (for a total of +5 at 10th level, +6 at 13th, +7 at 16th, to a maximum of +8 at 19th level). The subject can see through the armor as if it did not exist and is also afforded darkvision out to 60 feet. The subject gains a +2 saving throw bonus against any holy, good, or light spells or effects. Undead creatures that are subjects of armor of darkness also gain +4 turn resistance.  CHAPTER 1  ANYSPELL, GREATER  You gain an intuitive insight into the value of objects you come into contact with. You gain a +10 insight bonus on Appraise checks to determine the value of items you touch while this spell is in effect. Using the Appraise skill in this fashion requires 2 minutes instead of the normal 1 minute. Even if you fail an Appraise check while this spell is in effect, you never mistakenly estimate the worth of an item by more than 50%.  ARMOR OF DARKNESS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Anyspell allows you to read and prepare any arcane spell of up to 2nd level. You must have an arcane magical writing (a scroll or spellbook) on hand to cast anyspell. During the spell’s 15-minute casting time, you can scan the spells available and choose one to read and prepare. Once you choose and prepare an arcane spell, you retain it in your mind. The prepared spell occupies your 3rd-level domain spell slot. If you read the spell from a spellbook, the book is unharmed, but reading a spell from a scroll erases the spell from the scroll. When you cast the arcane spell, it works just as though cast by a wizard of your cleric level except that your Wisdom score sets the save DC (if applicable). You must have a Wisdom of at least 10 + the arcane spell’s level to prepare and cast it. Your holy symbol substitutes for any noncostly material component. If the spell has a costly material component (one to which a gold piece value is assigned), you must provide it. If the spell has another focus, you must provide the focus. If the spell has an XP component, you must pay the experience point cost.  Encirclingyoureyewiththumbandforeﬁnger as if holding a jeweler’s lens, you speak the arcane words that complete the spell. Objects near you suddenly seem clearer, more in focus. You note blemishes and imperfections you had missed before.  ARROW MIND  Divination Level: Ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  . . . leave no doubt as to the source of the spell  15  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The bow in your hand feels more like an extensionofyourbodyasyoucompletethe spell—as if it’s become a part of your arm. Creaturesnearbyseemsharpertoyoureyes, more in focus. While this spell is in effect and you are wielding a projectile weapon that ﬁres arrows, such as a longbow or shortbow, you threaten all squares within your normal melee reach (5 feet if Small or Medium, 10 feet if Large) with your bow, allowing you to make attacks of opportunity with arrows shot from the bow. In addition, you do not provoke attacks of opportunity when you shoot a bow while you are in another creature’s threatened square. Material Component: A ﬂint arrowhead.  ARROW OF BONE  Necromancy [Death] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: One projectile or thrown weapon touched Duration: 1 hour/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes You complete the long ritual needed to cast the spell, scribing arcane runes into the item. It changes before your eyes into an identical item made of bone. The runes glowwithdarkmagicandtheweaponfeels cold to the touch. When thrown or ﬁred at a creature as a normal ranged attack, the weapon gains a +4 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls. In addition, any living creature struck by an arrow of bone must succeed on a Fortitude save or be instantly slain. A creature that makes its save instead takes 3d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20). Regardless of whether the attack hits, the magic of the arrow of bone is discharged by the attack, and the missile is destroyed. Material Component: A tiny sliver of bone and an oil of magic weapon (50 gp).  16  ARROW STORM  Transmutation Level: Ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Your bow glows blue for an instant and now feels as light as a feather in your hand. In your mind’s eye you see the arrows in your quiver, and your hand feels drawn to them. You can cast this spell only at the beginning of your turn, before you take any other actions. After casting arrow storm, you can use a full-round action to make one ranged attack with a bow with which you are proﬁcient against every foe within a distance equal to the weapon’s range increment. You can attack a maximum number of individual targets equal to your character level. If you choose not to spend a full-round action in this fashion after casting the spell, the spell has no effect.  ASPECT OF THE EARTH HUNTER  Transmutation Level: Druid 6, ranger 4 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) By completing the spell you call upon the world’sprimalenergies.Youfeeldisoriented for a moment as your face elongates into a snout, your limbs thicken, and your skin turns into silvery chitin. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a bulette (MM 30). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to magical beast, and your size changes to Huge. You have the space and reach of a bulette (15 feet/10 feet). You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average bulette (Str 27, Dex 15, Con 20), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your base land speed becomes 40 feet, and you gain a burrow speed of 10 feet. You gain  darkvision out to 60 feet. You also gain low-light vision, scent, and tremorsense out to 60 feet. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any extraordinary special abilities of your own form, as well as spell-like and supernatural abilities. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You cannot speak or cast spells while in bulette form. However, if you have the Natural Spell feat, you can cast spells normally. Your natural armor bonus becomes +12, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form. You can make two claw attacks, which are natural weapons that deal 2d8+8 points of damage. While in bulette form, you gain the bulette’s leap extraordinary attack form, allowing you to make four claw attacks instead of two. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Material Component: A small piece of a bulette’s armored shell.  ASPECT OF THE WOLF Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  With a howl you complete the spell. Instantly, your body sprouts short, thick fur.Yourspineandneckbend,causingyou to drop to your hands and knees—which quickly shorten into canine limbs. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a wolf (MM 283). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to animal, and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a wolf (5 ft./5 ft.). You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average wolf (Str 13, Dex 15, Con 15), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your base land speed becomes 50 feet. You gain low-light  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: See text Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  ATTUNE FORM  You touch the pebble against your allies’ ﬂesh and bring them into attunement with the plane.  ASSAY SPELL RESISTANCE  Divination Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Finishing the spell, your eyes glow with a pale blue radiance, and you understand how to overcome your foe’s resistance to your magic. This spell gives you a +10 bonus on caster level checks to overcome the spell resistance of a speciﬁc creature. Assay resistance is effective against only one speciﬁc creature per casting, and you must be able to see the creature when you cast the spell.  ASTRAL HOSPICE  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, M  Augment familiar makes a familiar more threatening than it appears  This spell can be cast only upon the Astral Plane (DMG 154). It opens up a small planar portal to a demiplane where natural healing can occur (unlike on the Astral Plane itself). The ﬁrm surface of the demiplane is roughly 50 feet square, and the demiplane extends 50 feet above the surface. The demiplane’s traits (including time, gravity, and magic) match those of the Material Plane, and the demiplane is self-contained; walking to one end returns a character to the point from which he began. The demiplane has no unusual planar traits.  Illus. by J. Nelson  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One creature/3 levels Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You ﬁsh out the gem and, ﬂoating in the AstralPlane,castthespell.Asmallpinprick of light appears next to you, widening to form a circular portal of a bronze hue. You step through the portal and begin the process of healing.  The only way in or out of the demiplane is through the entrance created by you, and only those named or described by you upon the casting of the spell can enter. The portal continues to exist and remains visible on the Astral Plane only while the hospice demiplane exists. When you leave the demiplane, the portal seals shut and vanishes. Anyone still in the hospice demiplane at that time appears on the Astral Plane at the location of the hospice’s entrance. Material Component: A single ﬂawless gemstone of at least 250 gp value.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  vision and scent. You gain a bite attack, which is a primary natural attack that deals 1d6+1 points of damage with each successful hit. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any extraordinary special abilities of your own form, as well as spell-like and supernatural abilities. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You cannot speak or cast spells while in wolf form. However, if you have the Natural Spell feat, you can cast spells normally. Your natural armor bonus becomes +2, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form. While in wolf form, you gain the wolf’s trip extraordinary attack form, allowing you to make a free trip attempt against any opponent that you hit with your bite attack. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Arcane Material Component: A whisker from a wolf.  This spell allows you to attune the affected creatures to the plane you are currently on, negating the harmful effects of that plane. Affected creatures gain the protections described in the avoid planar effects spell (page 19). ArcaneMaterialComponent: A bit of stone or earth from your home plane.  AUGMENT FAMILIAR  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Your familiar Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  17  Reaching out with magic, you empower your familiar, making it quicker and stronger.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  This spell grants your familiar a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution, damage reduction 5/magic, and a +2 resistance bonus on saving throws.  AURA AGAINST FLAME Abjuration Level: Cleric 2, druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  With the casting of this spell you are surrounded with a cool, blue mist that clings to your body, dampening the heat of the nearby ﬂames. You create an aura of blue mist that protects you against ﬁre, absorbing the ﬁrst 10 points of ﬁre damage as a resist energy (ﬁre) spell (PH 272). In addition to the resist energy (ﬁre) effect, the spell can be used to snuff out ﬁres. Any nonmagical ﬂame that the aura contacts is immediately extinguished if the ﬂame’s maximum damage is 10 or fewer points per round. This means that torches, small ﬁres, and hurled alchemist’s ﬁre are snuffed out and cause no damage if used against you or if you touch them. You can use a standard action to touch an existing magical ﬁre (such as a ﬂaming sphere or a wall of ﬁre) and attempt to dispel it as if using a dispel magic spell against it (use the caster level of aura against ﬂame for the caster level check). If you succeed, you take no damage from the touch and the magical ﬁre and aura both vanish. If you fail, you take damage from the magical ﬁre source normally (reduced by your aura against ﬂame), and both spells remain. With a readied action, you can use the aura as a dispel magic effect to counterspell a magical ﬁre attack against you. If successful, the spell is counterspelled and the aura disappears. If you fail the dispel check, or if the attack is not a ﬁre attack, the aura remains.  18  AURA OF EVASION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: No Spell Resistance: No “Stay together,” you shout, and intone the wordsofthisspell,castingthecrushedgemstone in the air at its conclusion. You are all bathed in a silver-green nimbus of light. You and all creatures within 10 feet of you gain evasion, but only against breath weapons. (If a breath weapon would normally allow a Reﬂex saving throw for half damage, a creature within an aura of evasion that successfully saves takes no damage instead.) Creatures within the spell’s area that already have evasion or improved evasion get a +4 bonus on Reﬂex saving throws against breath weapons. Material Component: Powdered emerald worth 500 gp.  AURA OF GLORY  Transmutation Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Area: 10-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You invoke the holy words and a soft golden light radiates from you. You feel surer of yourself, bolstered by the power of your beliefs. You channel divine power into yourself, spreading glory to your comrades. This spell removes any fear effect from all allies within your aura of courage.  AURA OF TERROR  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you  Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You speak a few curt words and your face is brieﬂy overlaid with the image of a violet-shaded skull. The skull fades, but the nimbus of violet light remains around you. You become surrounded by an aura of fear, granting you a frightful presence not unlike that of a dragon. Whenever you charge or attack, you inspire fear in all creatures within 30 feet that have fewer Hit Dice than your caster level. Each potentially affected opponent must succeed on a Will save or become shaken—a condition that lasts until the opponent is out of range. A successful save leaves that opponent immune to your frightful presence for 24 hours. If you cast this spell when you already have the frightful presence ability or a fear aura, the existing ability becomes more effective in the following ways: • The radius of the area affected by the ability increases by 10 feet. • The DC of your frightful presence ability increases by 2. • Creatures that would normally be shaken by your fear aura are frightened instead, and creatures that would normally be frightened are panicked.  AURA OF VITALITY  Transmutation Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Oneafteranother,yourcompanionsbegin toradiateasoft,goldenglow.Theybreathe deeply, suffused with additional mystic power. All subjects receive a +4 morale bonus to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution.  AVASCULAR MASS  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If the attack is successful, the subject loses half its hit points (rounded down) and is stunned for 1 round. On a successful Fortitude saving throw, the subject is not stunned. Oozes and plants are not affected by this spell. The avascular mass instantaneously erupts from the subject and must be anchored to at least two opposed points—such as ﬂoor and ceiling or opposite walls—or else the mass collapses and has no effect. Creatures caught within a 20-foot-radius avascular mass become entangled. The original target of the spell is automatically entangled. Because the avascular mass is magically animate and gradually tightens on those it holds, an entangled character who attempts to cast a spell must make a DC 25 Concentration check or lose the spell. Anyone within 20 feet of the primary target when the spell is cast must make a Reﬂex save. If this save succeeds, the creature is not stuck in the avascular mass and is free to act, though moving might be a problem (see below). If the save fails, the creature is stuck. A stuck creature can break loose by spending 1 round and succeeding on a DC 20 Strength check or a DC 25 Escape Artist check. Once loose (either from making the initial Reﬂex save or a later Strength check or Escape Artist check), a creature can progress  AVASCULATE  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Deathbound 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Youshootablackrayofnecromanticenergy fromyouroutstretchedhand,causingyour foe to violently purge blood or other vital ﬂuids through his skin. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If the attack succeeds, the subject is reduced to half of its current hit points (rounded down) and stunned for 1 round. On a successful Fortitude saving throw, the subject is not stunned.  AVOID PLANAR EFFECTS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2, druid 2, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: 20 ft. Targets: One creature/level in a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You gain a temporary respite from the natural effects of a speciﬁc plane. These effects include extremes in temperature, lack of air, poisonous fumes, emanations of positive or negative energy, or other attributes of the plane itself (DMG 150). Avoid planar effects provides protection from the 3d10 points of ﬁre damage that characters normally take when on a plane with the ﬁre-dominant trait. Avoid planar effects allows a character to breathe water on a waterdominant plane and ignore the threat of suffocation on an earth-dominant plane. A character protected by avoid planar effects can’t be blinded by the energy of a major positive-dominant plane and automatically stops gaining temporary hit points when they equal the character’s full normal hit point total. Negative-dominant planes don’t deal damage or bestow negative levels to characters protected by avoid planar effects. In addition, some effects speciﬁc to a plane are negated by avoid planar effects. In the D&D cosmology, avoid planar effects negates the deafening effect of Pandemonium and the cold damage on the Cania layer of the Nine Hells. The DM can add additional protections for a cosmology he creates. If the campaign has an Elemental Plane of Cold, for example, avoid planar effects protects against the base cold damage dealt to everyone on the plane. The effects of gravity traits, alignment traits, and magic traits aren’t negated by avoid planar effects, nor is the special entrapping trait of certain planes (such as Elysium and Hades). The spell does not provide protection against creatures, native or otherwise, nor does it protect against spells, special abilities, or extreme and nonnatural formations within the plane. This spell allows you to survive on the Elemental Plane of Earth, for instance, but it won’t protect you if you walk into a pool of magma on that same plane.  CHAPTER 1  Youshootablackrayofnecromanticenergy fromyouroutstretchedhand,causingyour foetoviolentlypurgebloodvesselsthrough its skin. The purged blood vessels spread outward, creating a many-layered mass of bloody, adhesive tissue that traps nearby creatures in a gory horror.  The danger of the plane surprises you, and youhavebarelytimetobarkoutafew elder words of power. In a moment you’re safe, and you gain a brief respite—time enough to cast more permanent protective spells.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Deathbound 8, sorcerer/ wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: See text Saving Throw: Fortitude partial and Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  through the writhing blood vessels very slowly. Each round devoted to moving allows the creature to make a new Strength check or Escape Artist check. The creature moves 5 feet for each full 5 points by which the check result exceeds 10. If you have at least 5 feet of avascular mass between you and an opponent, it provides cover. If you have at least 20 feet of avascular mass between you, it provides total cover. The avascular mass of entangling tissue persists for 1 round per caster level. When the duration elapses, the blood vessel mass becomes so much limp, decaying tissue.  19  Mass awaken creates powerful allies for a druid  AWAKEN, MASS  AWAKEN CONSTRUCT Transmutation Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 8 hours Range: Touch  AWAKEN SIN  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Good, Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One evil creature with Intelligence 3+ Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Acommandforrepentanceissuesfromyour mouth, carrying with it the power of the spell.Thecrushingfeelingofguiltthatgrew within you while you cast the spell lifts as you project the feeling at your target. The subject immediately takes 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) and is stunned for 1 round. If this knocks the subject unconscious, it also takes 1d6 points of Wisdom damage.  Whispering secret words to the undead before you, you call forth a glimmer of intelligence in its dead eyes. This spell grants intelligence to mindless undead such as skeletons and zombies. Undead creatures with Intelligence scores are unaffected. A mindless undead gains an Intelligence score of 1d6+4, subject to the limitation that an undead cannot be more intelligent than is typical of a living creature of the same kind. A dog skeleton simply has Intelligence 2 (no roll needed), while an orc skeleton makes the die roll but can’t have more than Intelligence 8. (See MM 290 for information on skills and feats the creature gains.) Undead regain the armor and weapon proﬁciencies they had in life (assume the undead were formerly warriors unless the DM speciﬁes otherwise) and will don armor and take up weapons while obeying your commands. A zombie ﬁghter can wear any armor and wield any simple or martial weapon, and a warhorse zombie can wear any armor. Undead also regain any extraordinary racial abilities they had in life, such as poison or scent. Awakened undead gain a +2 profane bonus on their Will saving throws to resist control undead. Awakened undead also gain +2 turn resistance (or retain their own turn resistance, if any, and if it is better than +2). Material Component: A humanoid ﬁnger bone. XP Cost: 250 XP.  Illus. by J. Jarvis  You awaken one or more trees or animals to humanlike sentience. All awakened creatures must be of the same kind. To succeed, you must make a Will save (DC 10 + the HD of the highest-HD target, or the HD the highest-HD tree has once awakened, whichever is greater). Failure indicates that the spell fails for all targets. The awakened animal or tree is friendly toward you. You have no special empathy or connection with it, but it serves you in speciﬁc tasks or endeavors if you communicate your desires to it. An awakened tree has characteristics as if it were an animated object (MM 13), except that its Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores are all 3d6. Awakened plants gain the ability to move their limbs, roots, vines, creepers, and so forth, and they have senses similar to a human’s. An awakened animal has 3d6 Intelligence, a +1d3 bonus to Charisma, and +2 HD. An awakened tree or animal can speak one language that you know, plus one additional language that you know per point of its Intelligence bonus, if it has one. (See MM 290 for information on skills and feats the creature gains.) XP Cost: 250 XP per creature awakened.  This spell awakens a humanoid-shaped construct to humanlike sentience. An awakened construct’s Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores are all 3d6. The spell does not work on constructs that are constructs only temporarily (such as objects affected by an animate objects spell). The awakened creature is independent of both you and the being who originally made it, though it is initially friendly toward both you and its maker. (See MM 290 for information on skills and feats the creature gains.) Material Component: The brain of a humanoid that has been dead less than 8 hours. XP Cost: 5,000 XP.  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Deathbound 6, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: All mindless undead within a circle with a radius of 25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  CHAPTER 1  After a full day of constant spellcasting, you ﬁnally succeed in bringing sentience to the subjects.  Tendrils of writhing light cover your hand and the brain it holds. The light disperses into the construct you touch, enveloping it in a soft white corona for several seconds before the creature’s body absorbs the radiance.  AWAKEN UNDEAD  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 24 hours Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One animal or tree/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Target: One construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  21  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  AXIOMATIC STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Lawful, Water] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You call upon the forces of law and a heavy rainbeginstofallaroundyou,itsraindrops harshandmetallic.Aboveyou,ajetofcaustic acid lances down from the heavens. A driving rain falls around you. It falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages chaotic creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (chaotic outsiders take double damage). In addition, each round, a gout of acid strikes a randomly selected chaotic outsider within the spell’s area, dealing 5d6 points of acid damage. After the spell’s duration expires, the water disappears. Material Component: A ﬂask of axiomatic water (see the axiomatic water spell, below).  You speak the ancient, slippery words as you pour the iron and silver into the ﬂask. Despite the fact that there is more powder than will ﬁt in the container, all of it dissolves, leaving a ﬂask of water dotted with motes of gunmetal gray. This transmutation imbues a ﬂask (1 pint) of water with the order of law, turning it into axiomatic water. Axiomatic water damages lawful outsiders the way holy water damages undead and evil outsiders. A ﬂask of axiomatic water can be thrown as a splash weapon. Treat this attack as a ranged touch attack with a range increment of 10 feet. A ﬂask breaks if thrown against the body of a corporeal creature, but to use it against an incorporeal creature, the bearer must open the ﬂask and pout the axiomatic water out onto the target. Thus, a character can douse an incorporeal creature with axiomatic water only if he is adjacent to it. Doing so is a ranged touch attack that does not provoke attacks of opportunity. A direct hit by a ﬂask of axiomatic water deals 2d4 points of damage to a chaotic outsider. Each such creature within 5 feet of the point where the ﬂask hits takes 1 point of damage from the splash. MaterialComponent: 5pounds ofpowdered iron and silver (worth 25 gp).  BABAU SLIME  Transmutation Level: Abyss 3, druid 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You press the viscous ball of demon sweat betweenyourﬁngersandspeaktheeldritch words. Your ﬂesh and equipment begin to weep hot red tears that quickly form a coating over your body.  This demon-inspired transmutation causes the subject to secrete a slimy red layer of jelly that coats its skin, armor, and equipment. A creature that strikes a slime-protected subject with an unarmed strike, a touch attack (including a touch spell), or a natural weapon takes 1d8 points of acid damage. Any creature in a grapple with the target of babau slime takes 1d8 points of acid damage at the beginning of its turn. Arcane Material Component: A drop of babau slime.  AXIOMATIC WATER Transmutation [Lawful] Level: Cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Flask of water touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  Backbiter turns a weapon against its wielder  22  BACKBITER  You cast this spell on any melee weapon. The next time that weapon is used to make a melee attack, its shaft twists around so that the weapon strikes the wielder instead. The weapon hits automatically, and no attack roll is made. The wielder gets no warning or knowledge of the spell’s effect on his weapon, and although he makes the attack, the self-dealt damage can’t be consciously reduced (though damage reduction applies) or changed to nonlethal damage. Once the weapon attacks its wielder (whether successfully or not), the spell is discharged. Magic weapons targeted by this spell receive a Will save. An item in a creature’s possession uses its own Will save bonus or its wielder’s bonus, whichever is higher. Focus: A dagger.  BACKLASH  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You touch your opponent and a red aura entwines him, then fades without further effect. You back away as your opponent laughs and begins to cast a spell.  Divination Level: Druid 2, ranger 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  Asyouperformtheﬁnalgesturesofthespell you feel magic surround you, pushing on you from all sides as if trying to help keep you standing tall. You gain a +4 insight bonus on Balance checks. If you have sufﬁcient ranks in the Balance skill, you can even balance on an otherwise-impossible surface with a DC 20 Balance check. If you have 5 or more ranks in Balance, you can balance on vertical surfaces; the normal modiﬁer for a sloped or angled surface no longer applies to you, though other DC modiﬁers (such as for a slippery surface) do apply. If you balance on a vertical surface, you can move up or down as if you were climbing. However, you are not actually climbing, so you can make attacks normally, retain your Dexterity bonus to Armor Class, and generally follow the rules of the Balance skill rather than the Climb skill. If you have 10 or more ranks in Balance, you can balance on liquids, semisolid surfaces such as mud or snow, or similar surfaces that normally couldn’t support your weight. For each consecutive round that you begin balanced on a particular surface of this sort, the DC of your Balance check increases by 5. As with all uses of the Balance skill, you move at half speed unless you decide to use the accelerated movement option (thereby increasing the DC of the Balance check by 5). Arcane Material Component: A thin, 3-inch-long wooden dowel.  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Two creatures of up to Large size Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Seeingyourfriendimperiled,youcastabout for a likely target and settle upon a nearby foe.Withaword,yourallystandsfreewhile your foe faces death.  CHAPTER 1  Theweaponyouindicateduringthespell’s castingbrieﬂyshimmerswithablackaura that disappears in an eyeblink.  BALANCING LORECALL  BALEFUL TRANSPOSITION  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One weapon Duration: 1 round/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  The ﬁrst time the target creature attempts to cast a spell or use a spelllike ability, the magic of that spell backﬁres. The spell is expended, and the creature takes 1d6 points of damage per level of the spell being cast. This discharge ends the spell.  Two target creatures, of which you can be one, instantly swap positions. A solid object such as the ground, a bridge, or a rope must connect the creatures. Both subjects must be within range. Objects carried by the creatures (up to the creatures’ maximum loads) go with them, but other creatures do not, even if they are carried. The movement is instantaneous and does not provoke attacks of opportunity. If either creature succeeds on its Will save, the spell is negated.  BALL LIGHTNING  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One lightning ball Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes Withacircuitouspassofyourhandthrough theair,acracklingballoflightningappears before you, accompanied by the smell of ozone. You create a 5-foot-diameter ball of concentrated electricity that rolls in whichever direction you point, dealing electricity damage to creatures it strikes. It moves 30 feet per round. As part of this movement, it can ascend or jump up to 30 feet to strike a subject. If it enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for the round and deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per caster level  23  Illus. b M. Phillippi  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  (maximum 15d6), though a successful Reﬂex save negates that damage. The ball moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action for you), otherwise it merely stays at rest, damaging any creature in its space. It cannot push aside unwilling creatures or batter down large obstacles. The lightning winks out if it exceeds the spell’s range. Material Component: A handful of copper and iron pellets.  BALOR NIMBUS  Transmutation Level: Abyss 4, Cleric 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You smash the soot against your ﬂesh and intone the ancient, dark words. Like the legendary balor, your body bursts into lurid ﬂames.  The ﬂames created by this spell do not harm you or any equipment you carry or wear. Each round, the ﬂames deal 6d6 points of ﬁre damage to any creature grappling you (or any creature you grapple) on your turn. Arcane Material Component: A pinch of soot.  BANDS OF STEEL  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: No Theinterlockinghoopsbecomebrieﬂyhot thendisappearevenassimilar,largerbands streakfromyouroutstretchedhandtoward thecreatureyouindicate.Withasatisfying metallic clank, the bands wrap around the indicated creature. The victim must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be immobilized and thus unable to move. If the saving throw succeeds, the victim is only partially trapped by the bands, and is entangled. A creature immobilized by the bands can attempt to escape as a fullround action, either by bursting free  Ball lightning’s versatility makes it an effective spell in many situations  (Strength DC 18) or wriggling out (Escape Artist DC 18). An entangled creature can use a fullround action to break free (Strength DC 13) or disentangle itself (Escape Artist DC 13). Material Component: Three small silver hoops, interlocked.  BARGHEST’S FEAST  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: Corpse touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) The diamond in your hand turns to coal, and then to dust, which sprinkles down upon the corpse. Where it strikes, ebon ﬂames spring up, and when the ﬂames pass nothing remains, not even grave dust. “Return from that one,” you mutter. Black ﬂames ﬂicker over a corpse, utterly consuming it. You destroy the remains of a dead person or creature,  preventing any form of raising or resurrection that requires part of the corpse. There is a 50% chance that a wish, miracle, or true resurrection spell cannot restore to life a victim consumed by a barghest’s feast spell. Check once for each destroyed creature. If the d% roll fails, the creature cannot be brought back to life by mortal magic. Material Component: A diamond worth 5,000 gp.  BATTERING RAM  24  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One object or creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  BATTLE HYMN  Enchantment (Charm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: All allies within 30 ft. Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You wave your hand as if a conductor and hum an uplifting tune under your breath. As the energy of the spell releases, you hear the air around you ﬁll with the song you are humming, as if performed by a small troupe.  Transmutation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level Withcrackleofpoppingjointsandtendons, yourhandsandﬁngersbecomelongcurving claws with heavy knuckles. You gain two claw attacks that act as slashing melee weapons, dealing 1d4 points of damage with a threat range of 19–20. Attacks with your transformed hands do not provoke attacks of opportunity. Your claws work just like the natural weapons of many monsters. You can make an attack with one claw or a full attack with two claws at your normal attack bonus, replacing your normal attack routine. You take no penalties for two-weapon ﬁghting, and neither attack is a secondary attack. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional  CHAPTER 1  You create a ramlike force that can strike with considerable power. The force can target a creature or an object. The force deals 1d6 points of damage to the subject. If the subject is a creature, this attack initiates a bull rush (as a Medium creature with Strength 30, for a +10 bonus on the bull rush attempt). If the subject is a movable object, such as a door, you can make a Strength check (with a +10 bonus) to attempt to force open the door. Focus: A piece of carved ram’s horn.  BEAST CLAWS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You point the shard of carved ram’s horn at your foe and snap off the last words of the spell.Aninvisiblewedgeofforceslamsinto the creature’s midsection, doubling it over and driving it back.  within the area who are friendly to you. These creatures can reroll one Will save that they have just made each round for the duration of the spell. The reroll must be made before the DM declares whether the roll results in success or failure, and the result of the second roll must be used, even if it is a lower result.  attacks—you simply have two claw attacks at your normal attack bonus. If you attack with a manufactured weapon or another natural attack, you can’t make any claw attacks in that round. The claws do not hinder your manual dexterity or spellcasting. Material Component: The claw of a bird of prey, such as an eagle or falcon.  BEASTLAND FEROCITY Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You cast the spell and lay your hand upon yourally,andbeneathyourglowingﬁngers, give him a mixed gift—the ability to ﬁght on, but at the cost of not knowing when to stop. The subject becomes such a tenacious combatant that it continues to ﬁght without penalty even while disabled or dying. While between –1 and –9 hit points, the creature gains a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength. If the creature is reduced to –10 hit points, it dies normally.  This spell brings forth a stirring martial tune that inspires all creatures  25  BEGET BOGUN  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Tiny construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With the bogun made, you take the ﬁnal step and imbue it with sentience,  breathing life into your new servant and companion. Beget bogun allows you to infuse living magic into a small mannequin that you have created from vegetable matter. This is the ﬁnal spell in the process of creating a bogun. See the bogun’s description for further details. Material Component: The mannequin from which the bogun is created. XP Cost: 25 XP.  Transmutation [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You uncork the vial and speak the old words.Thesmokeissuesfromthebottleand Bogun  CR 1  N, CN, LN, NE, or NG Tiny construct Init +3; Senses darkvision 60 ft., low-light vision; Listen +1, Spot +1 Languages telepathic link with master AC 15, touch 15, flat-footed 12 hp 11 (2 HD) Fort +0, Ref +3, Will +1 Speed 20 ft. (4 squares), fly 50 ft. (good) Melee nettles +1 (1d4–2 plus poison) Space 2-1/2 ft.; Reach 0 ft. Base Atk +1; Grp –5 Atk Options poison (nettles, DC 11, 1d6 Dex/1d6 Dex) Abilities Str 7, Dex 16, Con —, Int 8, Wis 13, Cha 10 SQ construct traits (MM 307) Feats Stealthy Skills Hide +10, Move Silently +9  A bogun is a small nature servant created by a druid. Like a homunculus, it is an extension of its creator, sharing the same alignment and link to nature. A bogun does not fight particularly well, but it can perform any simple action, such as attacking, carrying a message, or opening a door or window. For the most part, a bogun simply carries out its creator’s instructions. Because it is self-aware and somewhat willful, however, its behavior is not entirely predictable. On rare occasions (5% of the time), a bogun might refuse to perform a particular task. In that case, the creator must make a DC 11 Diplomacy check to convince the creature to cooperate. Success means the bogun performs the task as requested; failure indicates that it either does exactly the opposite or refuses to do anything at all for 24 hours (DM’s option as to which). A bogun cannot speak, but the process of creating one links it telepathically with its creator. It knows what its creator knows and can convey to him or her everything it sees and hears, up to a range of 500 yards. A bogun never travels beyond this range willingly, though it can be removed forcibly. In that case, it does everything in its power to regain contact  with its creator. An attack that destroys a bogun also deals its creator 2d10 points of damage. If its creator is slain, a bogun also dies, and its body collapses into a heap of rotting vegetation. A bogun looks like a vaguely humanoid mound of compost. The creator determines its precise features, but a typical bogun stands about 18 inches tall and has a wingspan of about 2 feet. Its skin is covered with nettles and branches. Combat: A bogun attacks by brushing against opponents with harsh nettles that deliver an irritating poison. Construction: Unlike a homunculus, a bogun is created from natural materials available in any forest. Thus, there is no gold piece cost for its creation. All materials used become permanent parts of the bogun. The creator must be at least 7th level and possess the Craft Wondrous Item feat to make a bogun. Before casting any spells, the creator must weave a physical form out of living (or once-living) vegetable matter to hold the magical energy. A bit of the creator’s own body, such as a few strands of hair or a drop of blood, must also be incorporated into this crude mannequin. The creator can assemble the body personally or hire someone else to do it. Creating this mannequin requires a DC 12 Craft (basketweaving or weaving) check. Once the body is finished, the creator must animate it through an extended magical ritual that requires a week to complete. The creator must labor for at least 8 hours each day in complete solitude in a forest grove; any interruption from another sentient creature undoes the magic. If the creator is personally weaving the creature’s body, that process and the ritual can be performed together. When not actively working on the ritual, the creator must rest and can perform no other activities except eating, sleeping, or talking. Missing even one day causes the process to fail. At that point, the ritual must be started anew, though the previously crafted body and the grove can be reused. On the final day of the ritual, the creator must personally cast control plants, wood shape, and beget bogun. These spells can come from outside sources, such as scrolls, rather than being prepared, if the creator prefers. 26  BELKER CLAWS  wraps itself around your hand, turning it into smoke as well.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  With a successful touch attack, you deal 2d12 points of damage. For every three caster levels, the smoke lasts for another round (to a maximum of 4 additional rounds at 12th level), dealing another 2d12 points of damage per round. Material Component: A small vial of smoke.  BENIGN TRANSPOSITION  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Two willing creatures of up to Large size Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  The belker claws spell makes a spellcaster’s touch a potent weapon  The spellcaster places a curse on the creature touched, choosing one of the three following effects.  Two target creatures, of which you can be one, instantly swap positions. Both subjects must be within range. Objects carried by the creatures (up to the creatures’ maximum loads) go with them, but other creatures do not, even if they are carried. The movement is instantaneous and does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  • One ability score is reduced to 1, or two ability scores take –6 penalties (to a minimum score of 1). • –8 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks. • Each turn, the subject has a 25% chance to act normally; otherwise, it takes no action.  BESTOW CURSE, GREATER  Necromancy Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Channelingyourhatredintobindingwords of power, you thrust your hand at your foe and proclaim a terrible curse.  You can also invent your own curse, but it should be no more powerful than those described above, and the Dungeon Master has the ﬁnal say on the curse’s effect. A greater curse cannot be dispelled, nor can it can be removed with break enchantment or limited wish. A miracle or wish spell removes a greater curse, as does remove curse cast by a spellcaster of at least 17th level.  BINDING WINDS  Evocation [Air] Level: Druid 2, Windstorm 2 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Concentration Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by E. Polak  Callingoutthearcanewords,yousuddenly stand where your companion was, and he has taken your place, outside the reach of his foes.  Callinguponthepowerofelementalair,you encircle the target in whipping winds. The subject can act normally, but it cannot move from its current location. The winds carry its voice away, so it can speak but cannot be heard, and it cannot hear anything but the roar of the winds. This spell distracts spellcasters, and so a Concentration check is required to successfully cast any spell (DC equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). Furthermore, no sonic or languagedependent spells or effects can be cast into or out of the winds (though spells cast by you upon yourself function normally). Ranged attacks made into or out of the winds take a –2 penalty. Binding winds holds ﬂying creatures in midair.  27  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  BITE OF THE KING  Necromancy Level: Gluttony 8, Hunger 8 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One living creature of a size that does not exceed caster’s Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your mouth opens impossibly wide and engulfs your foe. You swallow loudly and yourmouthreturnstonormalsize,leaving no trace of your foe behind. When you cast this spell, you can send a creature to a pocket “stomach” dimension with a successful melee touch attack. The target you touch must make a successful Fortitude save. If it fails its saving throw, the creature is sent to the stomach dimension. The victim takes 2d8+12 points of bludgeoning damage and 12 points of acid damage per round while in the stomach dimension. The victim can cut its way out by using a light slashing or piercing weapon to deal 35 points of damage to the stomach dimension (AC 21). A creature that successfully exits appears to cut its way free from thin air, appearing in a space adjacent to you. Each time you cast this spell, you create a separate temporary stomach dimension.  BITE OF THE WEREBEAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level With an inhuman roar, your face extends and expands, and your hands enlarge into clawedpaws.Powerfulmusclebuildsunder your skin, and you become a half-bear creature. You gain a +16 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +2 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +8 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +7 enhancement  28  bonus to natural armor. Your hands become claws, granting you two claw attacks, and your mouth becomes that of a bear, giving you a bite attack. You can attack with both claws at your full attack bonus, but your bite attack takes a –2 penalty (as if you had the Multiattack feat). Each claw deals 1d8 points of damage (1d6 if you are Small) + your Str modiﬁer, and your bite deals 2d8 points of damage (2d6 if you are Small) + 1/2 your Str modiﬁer. You gain the beneﬁts of the Blind-Fight and Power Attack feats, as well. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A tuft of bear fur.  BITE OF THE WEREBOAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youshakeyourhead,andyourfacereshapes itself into the visage of a boar. As this happens,yourbodybecomesbulkier,andyour shoulders and back bristle with hair. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +6 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +8 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Your face becomes that of a boar, and you gain a bite attack that deals 1d8 points of damage (or 1d6 points if you are Small) + 1-1/2 times your Str modiﬁer. You also gain the beneﬁt of the Blind-Fight feat. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: Four boar bristles.  BITE OF THE WERERAT Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  Withasneeze,yougrowawhiskeredsnout and ratlike tail as ﬁne gray fur covers your thickening skin. You gain a +6 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +2 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +3 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Your face lengthens into a ratlike snout, and you gain a bite attack that deals 1d4 points of damage (or 1d3 points if you are Small) + 1-1/2 times your Str modiﬁer. You also gain the beneﬁt of the Weapon Finesse feat. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A rat’s tail.  BITE OF THE WERETIGER  Transmutation Level: Druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Yousnarl,andyourfeaturesshiftintothose of a tiger. Your hands grow sharp claws, and the thick skin and striped fur of a tiger covers your body. You gain a +12 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +6 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +5 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Your hands become claws, granting you two claw attacks, and your mouth becomes that of a tiger, giving you a bite attack. You can attack with both claws at your full base attack bonus, but your bite attack takes a –2 penalty (as if you had the Multiattack feat). Each claw deals 1d8 points of damage (1d6 if you are Small) + your Str modiﬁer, and your bite deals 2d6 points of damage (2d6 if you are Small) + 1/2 your Str modiﬁer. You gain the beneﬁts of the Blind-Fight and Power Attack feats, as well. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A tiger’s claw.  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  BLACKFIRE  BLACK BLADE OF DISASTER  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial and Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Sword-shaped planar rift Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  With the dark words still on your tongue, a rayofblackenergyspringsfromyourhand towraptheindicatedtargetinblackﬂames that absorb heat rather than create it. The blackﬁrecracklesandhisses,emanatingthe smells of hot metal and sulfur.  Asyoucastthespell,alargeblacktearinthe universe appears in the form of a crackling ebony sword made of the material of the planes. The blade ﬂies off at your mental command to destroy your foes. You create a black blade-shaped planar rift about 3 feet long. The blade strikes at any creature within its range, as you desire, starting the round you cast the spell. The blade makes a melee touch attack against its designated target once each round. Its attack bonus is equal to your base attack bonus + your Intelligence bonus or your Charisma bonus (for wizards and sorcerers, respectively).  Illus. by W. England  You gain a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength, a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +4 enhancement bonus to Constitution, and a +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor. You gain a bite attack that deals 1d6 points of damage (or 1d4 points if you are Small) + 1-1/2 times your Str modiﬁer. You also gain the beneﬁt of the Blind-Fight feat. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks. Material Component: A wolf’s tooth.  CHAPTER 1  A howl erupts from your lips as your face contorts and expands into a wolﬂike form.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Anything hit by the blade is disintegrated if it fails a Fortitude save, taking 2d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 40d6), or 5d6 points of damage if the saving throw is successful. The blade can pass through any magical barrier equal to or less than its spell level, but cannot penetrate dead magic areas or an antimagic ﬁeld. It can harm ethereal and incorporeal creatures as if it were a force effect. The blade always strikes from your direction. It does not get a ﬂanking bonus or help a combatant get one. If the blade exceeds its range or goes out of your line of sight, the spell ends. You can direct the blade to attack another target as a standard action. A gate spell can be used to counterspell a black blade of disaster. A dimensional anchor spell cast at the blade dispels it automatically. The blade cannot be harmed by physical attacks, but dispel magic, a sphere of annihilation, or a rod of cancellation can affect it. Its touch attack AC is 13.  BITE OF THE WEREWOLF  A black blade of disaster can bring death to any creature it touches  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. On a successful attack, a living target is engulfed in chill black ﬂames that feed on the fuel of their victim’s life force. A creature engulfed in blackﬁre must make a successful Fortitude save each round that the spell is in effect or take 1d4 points of Constitution damage and become nauseated. A creature that makes its Fortitude save takes no  29  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  damage for that round and is sickened instead. In addition to its effects on the subject, blackﬁre can spread rapidly. Each round on its turn, any living creature adjacent to a creature engulfed in blackﬁre must succeed on a Reﬂex save or become engulfed itself. Any creature that has its Constitution reduced to 0 or lower by the spell is turned into a pile of black ash and can be returned to life only by true resurrection or wish, the caster of which must succeed on a DC 30 caster level check to restore the victim to life. If a creature succeeds on its Fortitude save in 3 consecutive rounds, the blackﬁre affecting it gutters out. The black ﬂames cannot otherwise be extinguished by normal means (such as immersion in water or smothering), but antimagic ﬁeld, a successful dispel magic, remove curse, or break enchantment snuffs it out. As well, a creature protected by death ward has immunity to blackﬁre’s effects. Material Component: A pinch of dust from a vampire destroyed by sunlight.  With a few short words of power, you draw the light from the surrounding area. Within just a few seconds, the light dims to utter darkness. You create an area of total darkness. The darkness is impenetrable to normal vision and darkvision, but you can see normally within the blacklit area. Creatures outside the spell’s area, even you, cannot see through it.  Range: 0 ft. Effect: Swordlike column of gnashing teeth Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Athree-foot-longcolumnofdisembodiedgnashingteethspringsforth from your hand. For the duration of the spell, you can make melee touch attacks that deal 1d6 points of damage +1 point per two caster levels (maximum +10). Your Strength modiﬁer does not apply to the damage. A creature that you successfully deal damage to must also make a Will saving throw or become frightened for 1d4 rounds.  BLADE STORM  Transmutation Level: Ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  BLACKLIGHT  Evocation [Darkness] Level: Darkness 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: A 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or point in space Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates or none (object) Spell Resistance: Yes or no (object)  30  You can cast the spell on a point in space, but the effect is stationary unless you cast it cast on a mobile object. You can cast the spell on a creature, and the effect then radiates from the creature and moves as it moves. Unattended objects and points in space do not get saving throws or beneﬁt from spell resistance.  Wands provide spellcasters with a way to keep spells on hand even when their daily spells are exhausted  Blacklight counters or dispels any light spell of equal or lower level, such as daylight. Material Component: A piece of coal and the dried eyeball of any creature.  BLADE OF PAIN AND FEAR  Evocation Level: Assassin 2, blackguard 2, cleric 3, Deathbound 2, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action  With a thought and a word you completethespell.Yourweapons shift color, becoming blue for a moment,andfeellighterinyour hands. An unseen force guides them, pulling them toward your enemies. You can cast this spell only at the beginning of your turn, before you take any other actions. After casting blade storm, you can take a full-round action to make one attack with each melee weapon you are currently wielding against every foe within reach. If you wield more than one weapon, or a double weapon, you can attack each foe once with each weapon or end, using the normal rules for two-weapon ﬁghting (PH 160). So, a ranger wielding a longsword and a short sword could attack each opponent he can reach with both weapons. If you choose not to spend a full-round action in this fashion after casting the spell, the spell has no effect.  BLADE THIRST  Transmutation Level: Ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: One slashing weapon Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  BLADES OF FIRE  Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Targets: Up to two melee weapons you are wielding Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Withawordyourweaponsburstintoﬂame. Youfeelnoheatandtheﬂamesmerelytickle your skin. Your melee weapons each deal an extra 1d8 points of ﬁre damage. This damage stacks with any energy damage your weapons already deal.  BLADEWEAVE  Illusion [Pattern] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: See text With a shout you unleash the power of the spell, causing every movement you make with your weapon to seem beautiful and full of ﬂourish.  Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No As you cast the spell, your hand becomes sheathedinbarelyperceptibleyellowﬂames. With a roar, the ﬂames burst from your hand in the shape of a cone, leaving your hand trailing wisps of smoke. Flames ﬁll the area, dealing 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to any creature in the area that fails its saving throw. Material Component: A bit of wick soaked in oil.  BLAST OF FORCE  Evocation [Force] Level: Force 3, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Drawinguponmagicinitspurestform,you sendinvisibleenergywhistlingthroughthe air to batter your foe. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A blast of force deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). In addition, a successful hit forces the subject to make a Fortitude save or be knocked prone (size and stability modiﬁers apply to the saving throw as if the spell were a bull rush).  BLESS WEAPON, SWIFT Transmutation Level: Paladin 1  Youinvoketheholywordsquickly,andyour weapon ﬂashes a momentary blue-white radiance. This spell functions like bless weapon (PH 205), except as noted above.  BLESSED AIM  Divination Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 50 ft. Effect: 50-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You grant a slashing weapon a +3 enhancement bonus. The weapon sheds illumination as if it were a torch.  BLAST OF FLAME  Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Duration: 1 round  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You touch a blade, and it catches ﬁre. Unearthly blue ﬂames crackle along its length while the weapon beneath remains cold and unharmed.  Once per round, choose one target that you successfully attacked with a melee weapon. That creature must succeed on a Will save or be dazed for 1 round. Spell resistance applies to this effect.  With the blessing of your deity, you bolster your allies’ aim with an exhortation. This spell grants your allies within the spread a +2 morale bonus on ranged attack rolls.  BLESSING OF BAHAMUT  Abjuration [Good] Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You hear a distant dragon’s roar that no one else detects, and your skin takes on a platinum sheen. You gain damage reduction 10/magic for the spell’s duration. MaterialComponent:Acanaryfeather, which is ﬂung into the air.  BLINDING BREATH Transmutation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4  You expel your breath weapon, which crackles with eye-splitting intensity.  31  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The blessed aim spell grants all of a blackguard’s nearby allies a better chance to hit with ranged attacks  This spell functions like breath ﬂare (page 38), except that targets that fail their saving throws against your breath weapon are permanently blinded, rather than dazzled.  BLINDING SPITTLE  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One missile of spit Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Whipping your head forward with the last word of the spell, you spit a globule of dark liquid at your foe. You spit caustic saliva into your target’s eyes with a successful ranged touch attack. A –4 penalty applies to the attack roll. The subject is blinded until it can wash its eyes with water or some other rinsing ﬂuid, which requires a standard action.  32  This spell has no effect on creatures without eyes or creatures that don’t depend on eyes for vision.  BLINDSIGHT  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your intended subject, which then turns its head rapidly about as if looking for the source of some sound. This spell grants the subject the blindsight ability (MM 306) effective out to 30 feet.  BLINDSIGHT, GREATER Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, druid 4  This spell functions like blindsight, except as noted above and that the blindsight granted by the spell is effective out to 60 feet.  BLINK, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Bard 5, Celerity 8, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Animmaterialfogdescendsoveryoureyes asyoucompletethespell.Youperceivethe closeness of a parallel, ethereal reality, and youknowthatyoucanpassfreelybetween that world and the one upon which you stand. This spell functions like blink (PH 206), except that you have control over the timing of your “blinking” back and forth between the Ethereal Plane and the Material Plane. You can also ready an action to blink away from any physical or magical attack. The attack misses automatically unless it also affects ethereal targets (as a force effect does). While blinking, you have no chance of interfering  with your own attacks or your own spells. When moving through solid objects, you do not risk materializing inside one unless you actually end your movement there, in which case you materialize and are shunted off to the nearest open space, taking 1d6 points of damage per 5 feet traveled in this manner.  As you conclude the ritual to release the energyofthespell,youhurlablazingballof light toward the point you designate, and it erupts into a brilliant hovering sphere. All sighted creatures in the area are dazzled (no save), and the heat from the blistering radiance deals 2d6 points of ﬁre damage to all creatures and objects in the area each round on your turn (Fortitude half). Like a ﬁreball spell, blistering radiance erupts if it strikes any material body or solid barrier before attaining the prescribed range, and you must make a successful ranged touch attack to send the sphere through a narrow opening or passage. Blistering radiance counters or dispels any darkness spell of equal or lower level. Material Component: A bit of tinder and a small lens.  BLOOD FRENZY  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Any creature with the rage ability Duration: Special; see text Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  BLOOD SIROCCO  Evocation Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Effect: Cone-shaped emanation centered on you or on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a hot exhalation and a circular wave of your outstretched arm, a stiﬂing wind tearsacrossthelandscape,kickingupclouds of dust and sand and spreading out to blow over your foes. A blood sirocco blows out from your location with the force of a windstorm (DMG 95). Creatures in the affected area of Small or smaller size are knocked prone and rolled 1d4×10 feet, taking 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet. Medium creatures are knocked prone, and creatures of Large or Huge size are unable to move toward the origin point of the cone. A successful Fortitude save allows the creature to move normally in that round. In addition, the stiﬂing winds dehydrate those within the cone. In each round when an affected living creature fails its saving throw, it takes 2 points of damage. The wind of a blood sirocco automatically extinguishes candles, torches, and similar unprotected ﬂames. It causes protected ﬂames, such as those of lanterns, to dance wildly and has a 50% chance to extinguish these lights. The wind of a blood sirocco continues to blow from the origin point to the wide end of the cone for the duration of the spell. Any creature within this area is entitled a saving throw each round to ignore the effects of the blood sirocco.  Necromancy [Water] Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Up to ﬁve living creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Youforcefullyspit,endingyourspellcasting. Fromwhereyouspatarisesasea-greenorb of energy for each creature you intend as a subject of the spell. The orbs ﬂy to their designated targets and turn blood red as they impact.  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Fire, Light] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 50-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None and Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  The target creature enters a rage, as its rage special ability, but this rage does not count toward the creature’s number of rage attempts per day.  BLOOD TO WATER  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  BLISTERING RADIANCE  A hot rush of anger ﬂows through your target’s veins.  You transmute the subjects’ blood into pure water, dealing 2d6 points of Constitution damage. A successful Fortitude save halves the Constitution damage. This spell has no effect on living creatures with the ﬁre or water subtype.  BLOOD WIND  Evocation Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 caster levels) Target: A single creature with Intelligence 4 or higher Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) After you complete the spell, the subject’s limbs ripple with power and grow slightly in length. The subject can take a full attack action to use all of its natural weapons or unarmed strikes as if they were thrown weapons with a 20-foot range increment. The subject gestures as if making a melee attack, but the result of the attack affects a target within range. This spell does not actually grant reach, and so does not help provide a ﬂanking bonus or allow the subject to make attacks of opportunity at any range greater than normal. The  33  subject uses its normal melee attack bonuses and deals damage normally if it hits, though the target of the attacks can beneﬁt from cover or concealment.  Illub. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  BLOODHOUND  34  Divination Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 24 hours (D) A white ﬁlm slips over your vision. Strangely,youreyesseemmorefocusedand younotebarelyperceptibletracesofpassage that you had missed before. If you fail a Survival check to track a creature while this spell functions, you can immediately attempt another roll against the same DC to reestablish the trail. If the reroll fails, you must search for the trail for 30 minutes (if outdoors) or 5 minutes (if indoors) before trying again. A blood sirocco leeches away life by drawing blood into its howling winds  BLOODSTAR  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A bloodstar Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes In a ruby ﬂash a blood-colored, glowing crystal appears near your foes to suck the blood from their wounds. You create a magic construct called a bloodstar that shoots from your hand and hovers in the air anywhere within the limit of the range (each round, you can move the bloodstar anywhere within range with a standard action spent concentrating on the new position). The bloodstar pulses with ruby light (providing illumination in a 20-foot radius). Any creature you initially designate within 10 feet of the bloodstar that takes damage from any source must make a saving throw. On a failed save, the victim takes 1 point  of Constitution damage. Each time victims are damaged, they can attempt new saves. The bloodstar cannot be attacked or harmed by physical attacks. Focus: A ruby worth at least 30 gp.  BODAK’S GLARE  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Abyss 8, Cleric 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youinvokethepowersofdeepdarknessand your eyes vanish, looking like holes in the universe itself. Upon completion of the spell, you target a creature within range that can see you. That creature dies instantly unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save. The target need not meet your gaze. If you slay a humanoid creature with this attack, 24 hours later it transforms into a bodak (MM 28) unless it has been resurrected in the meantime. The bodak is not under your command, but can be controlled as normal with a rebuke undead check. Focus: A black onyx gem worth at least 500 gp.  BODY BLADES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  BODY HARMONIC  Transmutation Level: Bard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Yourubtherimofawater-ﬁlledglass,causing it to emit a piercing tone. As you chant a simple poem you feel the glass in your handcracklewithenergy,causingthehand holding it to become slightly numb. As you rub the glass, the targeted creature’s body begins to vibrate loudly and painfully in harmony with the tone. Each round you continue to concentrate on this spell, the victim takes 1d10 points of damage to one ability score. You must select a different ability score each round, and cannot  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 5 ft. Area: 5-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes By drawing on the power of the sun, you cause your body to emanate ﬁre. Fire extends 5 feet in all directions from your body, illuminating the area and dealing 1d4 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d4). Adjacent creatures take ﬁre damage each round on your turn.  BODY OF WAR  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Throwingbackyourarmsasyoucomplete the spell, you feel your body grow heavy andunresponsive.Amomentofpanicgrips you as your chest ceases to expand and you realize you are no longer breathing. Cold sweepsoveryourbodyasyouglancedown at your now-metallic ﬂesh. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a warforged titan (Eberron Campaign Setting 302). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to construct, and your size changes to Huge. You have the space and reach of a warforged titan (15 feet/15 feet). Your mindset changes so that you relish combat and cannot cast  CHAPTER 1  You sprout daggerlike blades from all the surfaces of your body and clothing. The blades appear metallic but are not actually metal, and never harm you or interfere with your movement or actions. You are proﬁcient with your blades, and they allow you to deal piercing damage equal to 1d6 + your caster level (maximum 1d6+5) with a successful grapple attack. You can also make a regular melee attack (or offhand attack) with the spikes, and they count as a light weapon in this case. If a creature initiates a grapple with you, it takes the same damage, and you gain a bonus on grapple checks to resist the grapple equal to the damage dealt. You get a +4 bonus on Escape Artist checks to escape from a net, rope, grappler, or spell that entangles.  BODY OF THE SUN  spells, even from magic items. You gain the Strength and Dexterity of an average warforged titan (Str 28, Dex 8), but you retain your own mental ability scores. You have no Constitution score while affected by this spell. Your base land speed becomes 50 feet. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You also gain low-light vision. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any extraordinary special abilities of your own form, as well as spell-like and supernatural abilities. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You cannot speak or cast spells while in warforged titan form. Your natural armor bonus becomes +18, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form, and you gain damage reduction 10/adamantine. As a construct, you have the following qualities: immunity to all mind-affecting spells and abilities, poison, sleep effects, paralysis, stunning, disease, death effects, necromancy effects, critical hits, nonlethal damage, ability drain, fatigue, exhaustion, energy drain, and to any effect that requires a Fortitude save (unless the effect also works on objects or is harmless). You also gain the warforged titan’s two attack forms (axe and maul), along with the trample special ability (damage 1d8+13; Reﬂex DC 25 half). The warforged titan’s axe deals 2d8 points of slashing damage and has a ×3 critical modiﬁer; its maul (essentially a huge warhammer) deals 2d8 points of bludgeoning damage and also has a ×3 critical modiﬁer. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Material Component: A miniature bronze hammer.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You ﬁnish the spell’s casting and shudder as slender, sharp-tipped spikes erupt from your body, limbs, and clothing.  damage any one ability score more than once every 5 rounds. The creature can attempt a Will saving throw each round to negate that round’s effect. While the subject is under the effect of body harmonic, its body whines and hums discordantly. The victim takes a –20 penalty on Move Silently checks. Focus: A crystal water-ﬁlled goblet worth at least 500 gp.  BOLT OF GLORY  Evocation [Good] Level: Cleric 6, Glory 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  35  The body of war spell turns any sorcerer or wizard into a potent combatant  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck takes varying damage, depending on its nature or its home plane of existence and your level. Creatures native to the Negative Energy Plane, evil-aligned outsiders, and all undead creatures take 1d12 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d12). Creatures native to the Material Plane or an Elemental Plane, or any other neutral-aligned outsiders, take 1d12 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 7d12). Creatures native to the Positive Energy Plane and all good-aligned outsiders are not affected by this spell.  You designate the spot on which the cylinder is centered. Each creature in the area that fails a Reﬂex saving throw takes 1d8 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d8) and is buried under 5 feet of rubble. A successful save halves the damage and avoids burial. A buried creature can free itself with a DC 20 Strength check (a full-round action), or it can be dug free by others (a single creature working alone requires 1 minute to free a trapped creature). A buried creature is unable to move, and cannot cast spells with somatic components, and any material components must be in hand. After this spell is cast, its area is covered in 5 feet of dense rubble (DMG 90) Focus: A quartz crystal embedded in rock.  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 5, Madness 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes With a strangled peal of laughter to complete the spell, you point your hand at your enemy and ﬁre a black beam from your ﬁnger. This spell grants you the ability to make one ray attack per round. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A living creature struck by the ray is dazed for 1d3 rounds if it fails its save.  BOMBARDMENT  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (15-ft. radius, 40 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: No  BONEFIDDLE  Necromancy Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature with a skeleton or exoskeleton Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You rub your middle ﬁnger across your thumb like a bow against a ﬁddle while simultaneously humming a discordant tune under your breath. Nearby, you see a translucent bone-white ﬁddle bow appear and sink into the ﬂesh of your target. It begins sawing, as if playing your target like a ﬁddle. You call up a ghostly ﬁddle bow in the air above the targeted creature. This bow immediately descends into the target body and begins to saw back and forth against its skeleton. Although the music produced is eerily beautiful, it causes intense pain and anguish in the victim. Each round on its turn, the victim must make a Fortitude save or take 3d6 points of sonic damage and a –20 penalty on Move Silently checks. A successful save negates the damage  BOTTLE OF SMOKE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Effect: One smoky, horselike creature Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youwaveanornatebottleaboutandsmoke twists into it, ﬁlling it with a white cloud. You create a plume of smoke that you capture in a special bottle you’re holding. If the bottle is thereafter opened before the spell duration expires, the smoke emerges to form a vaguely horselike creature made of wisps of smoke. It makes no sound, and anything that touches it simply passes through it. To mount this smoke horse, the would-be rider must make a DC 10 Ride check while holding the bottle in one hand. Anyone attempting to mount without the bottle simply passes through the horse’s form. Letting go of the bottle after mounting causes the rider to fall through the horse’s smoky form; he or she cannot thereafter remount without the intact bottle in hand. If the bottle is broken, the spell ends immediately and the rider (if mounted) falls to the ground. The smoke horse has a speed of 20 feet per caster level, to a maximum of 240 feet. It can send smoke billowing out behind it at the rider’s behest, leaving behind a bank of smoke 5 feet wide and 20 feet high as it moves. A severe wind, or magical wind of any kind, disperses the horse (and any smoke it has produced) instantly. Otherwise, the bank of smoke lasts 10 minutes, starting on the turn it was laid down. Starting or stopping the smoke trail is a free action. The mount and the smoke trail it produces give concealment to anyone behind them. The mount is immune to all damage and other attacks because material  Illus. by W. Reynolds  BOLTS OF BEDEVILMENT  and ends the spell. The spell’s effects continue even if the subject moves so that you no longer have line of sight or line of effect to it. Focus: A miniature silver ﬁddle worth at least 30 gp.  CHAPTER 1  You point to the empty air and boulders tumble into being, burying your opponents.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CallinguponthePositiveEnergyPlaneand the power of your faith, you project a white bolt of hissing positive energy at your foe.  37  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  objects and spells simply pass through it. It cannot attack. The rider can return the smoke horse to the bottle, and thus pause the spell, at any time by simply uncorking it (a move action) and stoppering it again (another move action) in the next round after the horse is inside. If the bottle is reopened later, the spell reactivates with its remaining duration intact. Regardless of how much duration remains unused, the spell ceases functioning 24 hours after it is cast. If dispelled at any time while the bottle is corked, the spell ends. Focus: An ornate, corked bottle worth at least 50 gp.  Branch to branch allows a druid or ranger to swing through the trees like a monkey  Illus. by J. Nelson  BRAIN SPIDER  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 7, Mind 7 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Targets: Up to eight living creatures Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You touch a spider’s body and think of the targets. As each target succumbs to the spell, a leg of the spider vanishes into nothingness. For the duration of the spell, as a standard action, you can eavesdrop on the thoughts of up to eight other creatures at once, hearing as desired: • A creature’s surface thoughts. • Individual trains of thought in whatever order you desire. • One nugget of information per caster level from all the minds regarding one particular topic, thing, or being. • The thoughts and memories of one creature of the group in detail.  Once per round, if you do not perform a detailed study of one creature’s mind, you can attempt (as a standard action) to implant a suggestion (PH 285) in the mind of any one of the affected creatures. The creature can make another Will saving throw to resist the suggestion, using the original save DC. (Creatures with special resistance to enchantment spells can  38  use this resistance to keep from being affected by the suggestion.) Success on this saving throw does not negate the other effects of the brain spider for that creature. Material Component: A dead spider of any size or type. It must still have all eight legs.  BRAMBLES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Wooden weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With the sound of twisting wood, the weapon you touch grows sharp spikes like rose thorns. For the duration of the spell, the weapon deals both piercing and bludgeoning damage. It gains a +1 enhancement bonus on its attacks and also gains a +1 enhancement bonus per caster level on melee damage rolls (maximum +10). This spell works only on melee weapons with wooden striking surfaces. For instance, it does not work on a bow, an arrow, or a metal mace. Material Component: A small thorn.  BRANCH TO BRANCH Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  With the last guttural utterance, your ﬁngers thicken and your arms lengthen slightly. You have the impression that you would feel more at ease in a canopy of trees. You gain a +10 competence bonus on Climb checks made in trees. As long as you remain at least 10 feet above the ground, you can brachiate (swing by branches and vines) in medium or dense forest, but not in sparse forest. When you brachiate, you gain a 10-foot enhancement bonus to your land speed and ignore the hampered movement penalties for undergrowth and other terrain features. You can charge while brachiating, but you can’t run. Naturally, some local conditions, such as areas of sparse forest, clearings, wide rivers, or other breaks in the forest canopy, might force you to return to the ground.  BREATH FLARE  Transmutation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1  Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round You exhale your breath weapon, and it ﬂashes brilliantly, surprising your foes.  Transmutation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Mist spreads in a 40-ft. radius, 20 ft. high Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a word of power and ﬂick of your wrist, a foul-smelling, ﬁne mist appears. The DC of any saving throw made within the mist against poison or disease increases by 2. The mist does not provide concealment.  BREATH WEAPON ADMIXTURE  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round You spit out two forms of energy as your breath weapon streaks toward your opponents.  BREATH WEAPON SUBSTITUTION  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round Your foes, prepared for your terrible ﬁery breath weapon, are caught off guard as you exhale a cone of caustic acid in their surprised faces. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you choose one type of energy other than that normally associated with your breath weapon: acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre. You can modify your breath weapon to use the selected energy type instead of its normal energy type. For example, an old red dragon whose breath weapon normally deals 16d10 points of ﬁre damage could use this spell to produce a cone dealing 16d10 points of acid damage instead.  BRIAR WEB  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  BREATH OF THE JUNGLE  When you use this spell to produce acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre energy, it is a spell of that type. For example, breath weapon substitution is an acid spell when you cast it to change your breath weapon to deal acid damage.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon that uses ﬁre or electricity, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, your breath weapon is suffused with bright light. In addition to taking the normal ﬁre or electricity damage, creatures that fail their saving throws against the breath weapon are dazzled for 1 minute per caster level. Sightless creatures are not affected by breath ﬂare.  For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you choose one type of energy other than that normally associated with your breath weapon: acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic. You can modify your breath weapon to add an equal amount of the energy you choose. For example, a great wyrm red dragon whose breath weapon normally deals 24d10 points of ﬁre damage could use this spell to produce a cone dealing 24d10 points of ﬁre damage and 24d10 points of acid damage. Even opposed types of energy, such as ﬁre and cold, can be combined using this spell. If you choose sonic energy, the save DC of your breath weapon is reduced by 2. When you use this spell to produce acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre energy, it is a spell of that type. For example, breath weapon admixture is an acid spell when you cast it to add acid damage to your breath weapon.  With a sound like a thousand knives being unsheathed, the plants in the area grow sharp thorns and warp into a thick briar patch. This spell causes grasses, weeds, bushes, and even trees to grow thorns and wrap and twist around creatures in or entering the area. The spell’s area becomes difﬁcult terrain, and creatures move at half speed within the affected area. Any creature moving through the area also takes 1 point of nonmagical piercing damage for each 5 feet moved. A creature with freedom of movement or the woodland stride ability is unaffected by this spell.  BRILLIANT AURA  Transmutation Level: Cleric 8, druid 8, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Targets: Weapons carried by one creature/2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Takingfreshinsightfromcontemplationof light, you cast the spell and set your allies aglow with white brilliance. This spell functions like brilliant blade (see below), except as noted here, and that all weapons of the subject creatures gain the brilliant energy special ability.  39  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  BRILLIANT BLADE  Transmutation Level: Cleric 7, druid 7, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One melee or thrown weapon, or ﬁfty projectiles (all of which must be in contact with each other at the time of casting) Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object)  The bristle spell temporarily enhances one suit of armor, causing it to grow long hard spikes that stick out in all directions. This spell does not work on clothing other than armor, but it does function  You transform a single melee weapon, natural weapon, thrown weapon, or group of projectiles into a weapon with the brilliant energy special ability (DMG 224). If this spell is cast on arrows or crossbow bolts, the effect on a particular projectile ends after one use, whether or not the missile strikes its intended target. Treat shuriken as arrows, rather than as thrown weapons, for the purpose of this spell.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Suit of armor touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a word and the sudden opening of yourhandyoucompletethespell.Touching  Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One willing creature/ level, no two of which are more than 20 ft. apart Duration: 1 minute/ level (D); see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a sharp jab of your ﬁnger, the water around your indicated subjects begins to push them toward the surface. The subjects of this spell are borne toward the surface at 60 feet per round until they are ﬂoating on it. The subject then rests at the top of the liquid (rescuing it from drowning if it was a sinking air-breather) and can swim away under its own power or be moved by others (such as with a rope). If the subject is removed from the liquid, the spell ends.  With a word, the indicated weapon glows with a soft bluewhite halo that emits a low, slowly pulsating hum. The faint smell of ozone permeates the air.  BRISTLE  40  asuitofarmorinstantlycausesthearmorto sprout long, deadly-looking spines.  BURNING BLOOD  Briar web wraps creatures in the thorny grip of nearby plants  with armor that already has spikes built in. The spikes are ﬂexible enough not to hamper the creature wearing the armor. Each round, the ﬁrst time the armor wearer attacks a target in melee, the spikes strike out as well, growing in length and hardness. The spikes have an attack bonus equal to your caster level and deal 2d6 points of damage. Your Strength modiﬁer does not apply to this damage.  BUOYANT LIFTING Evocation Level: Druid 1  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature; see text Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes The taste of copper ﬁlls your mouth and bloodyspatterspunctuatethelastfewwords thatunlockthespell.Yougagslightlyasthe blood in your mouth congeals, but disappears even as you release the spell. You taint a living creature’s blood with a hot, corrosive infusion, dealing 1d8 points of acid damage and 1d8 points of ﬁre damage per round. The subject  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By chopping your hand like an axe and utteringthelastfewphrasesofthespell,you causetheweaponyou’vetouchedtobecome wreathed in ﬂickering blue ﬂames. The ﬂames from this spell shed azure light out to 30 feet. These ﬂames do not harm the weapon or its wielder, but for the duration of the spell, it delivers ﬁre damage in addition to its normal damage. The enchanted weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of ﬁre damage on a successful hit. Also, on a critical hit, the weapon deals additional ﬁre damage based on the weapon’s critical multiplier: Critical Multiplier ×2 ×3 ×4  BURROW  Additional Fire Damage +1d10 +2d10 +3d10  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The subject can burrow through earth and loose rock (but not solid stone) with a speed of 30 feet (or 20 feet if it wears medium or heavy armor, or if it carries a medium or heavy load). Arcane Focus: A claw from a burrowing creature.  BURROW, MASS  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, ranger 3 Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart You call upon the power of the spell and, in turn, each of your allies’ hands gain a yellow nimbus, forming into the hands of large moles. This spell functions like burrow, except that it affects multiple creatures.  BUZZING BEE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No A small but extremely loud bee appears, buzzing around the head of the designated target. This spell creates an unnerving noise that disrupts the subject’s concentration. The subject is distracted and takes a –10 penalty on Move Silently checks. Creatures that can’t hear are not distracted. The DC of Concentration checks to cast spells or maintain concentration while distracted is equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast. The bee has a ﬂy speed of 180 feet (perfect). It remains near the subject in spite of darkness, invisibility, polymorph, cover, concealment, or any other attempt at disguising or hiding. The bee remains until the spell’s dura-  tion expires or the subject moves out of range. The bee can’t be attacked, but it can be dispelled. Material Component: A dab of honey.  CACOPHONIC BURST  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  BURNING SWORD  You invoke the spell and your hands glow with a yellow aura, the aura lengthening and forming into translucent mole hands. The smell of freshly turned earth ﬁlls the air.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  can attempt a Fortitude save each round to negate the damage, but a successful save does not prevent damage in future rounds. Searing pain limits the subject to a single move action in any round when it fails its Fortitude save. Burning blood does not affect creatures of the construct, elemental, ooze, plant, or undead types. Material Component: A drop of blood and a pinch of saltpeter.  You complete the spell with a scream, and echoesofyourcrytraveloutwardandburst into ear-shattering sounds. You cause a burst of low, discordant noise to erupt at the chosen location. It deals 1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to all creatures within the area. Cacophonic burst cannot penetrate the area of a silence spell.  CACOPHONIC SHIELD Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Your words speed into a jumble of sounds thatmixtogetheruntilonlyaconstant,faint buzzing sound remains. You create a barrier of sonic energy at a distance of 10 feet from yourself. Creatures on either side of the barrier hear it as a loud but harmless buzzing. Nonmagical sound (including sound produced by a thunderstone) does not cross the barrier. Supernatural or spell-based sounds or sonic effects penetrate the barrier only if the caster or originator of the effect succeeds on a caster level check (DC 11 + your caster level). A creature that crosses the barrier takes 1d6 points of sonic damage +1  41  Illus. by J. Nelson  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  point per caster level (maximum +20) and must make a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1 minute. The sonic vibrations create a 20% miss chance for any missiles (including siege weapon attacks) crossing the barrier in either direction. The barrier moves with you, but you cannot force another creature to pass through it (for example, by moving adjacent to an enemy). If you force a creature to pass through, the barrier has no effect on that creature.  You call across the boundaries of the multiverse, and the powers of Mechanus respond. The marut warps into place in an eyeblink with a whirling throb of thunder. “Whodenies death?”itaskswiththevoice of an avalanche.  CALL KOLYARUT  Conjuration (Calling) [Lawful] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One called kolyarut Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CALL MARUT  Conjuration (Calling) [Lawful] Level: Cleric 9, Mechanus 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)  Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One called zelekhut Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You make the necessary conjurations and the powers of Mechanus respond. The Zelekhut fades into view, its centaur form accompaniedbythesoundofrattlingsilver chains.“Whoseekstoescapejustice?” it asks with the solemn tones of a judge’s gavel. By casting this spell, you receive the aid of a zelekhut inevitable (MM 160). If you know an individual zelekhut’s name, you can request that individual by speaking the name during the spell (though you might get a different creature, anyway). You can ask the zelekhut to perform one duty for you. The task must take no more than 1 hour to complete. The inevitable does not ask for any payment for the task. XP Cost: 100 XP.  As you complete the spell, the powersofMechanusrespond.The kolyarutdoesnotmanifestbefore you as much as assembles itself in your presence, a single whirling cogunfoldinguntiltheconstructstands complete.“Whoistobepunished?”itasksin the ﬂat voice of a clock mechanism. By casting this spell, you receive the aid of a kolyarut inevitable (MM 159). If you know an individual kolyarut’s name, you can request that individual by speaking the name during the spell (though you might get a different creature, anyway). You can ask the kolyarut to perform one duty for you. The task must take no more than 1 hour to complete. The inevitable does not ask for any payment for the task. XP Cost: 250 XP.  42  Effect: One called marut Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CALTROPS A zelekhut only answers the call of a spellcaster who seeks justice  By casting this spell, you receive the aid of a marut inevitable (MM 159). If you know an individual marut’s name, you can request that individual by speaking the name during the spell (though you might get a different creature, anyway). You can ask the marut to perform one duty for you. The task must take no more than 1 hour to complete. The inevitable does not ask for any payment for the task. XP Cost: 500 XP.  CALL ZELEKHUT  Conjuration (Calling) [Lawful] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: See text Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youspeakthewordsandspreadyourpalm open,asifyouwerethrowingjacks.Coppery sparks spring from your palm, ﬁlling the corridor with small four-pronged spikes. A caltrops spell covers one 5-foot-by-5foot square with caltrops. Every time a creature moves into an area covered by caltrops or spends a round ﬁghting while standing in such an area, it might step on one. The caltrops make one attack roll (+0 melee) against the creature. For this attack, the target’s  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level Upon ﬁnishing the spell, your skin and clothingchangecolor,warpingtintandhue to match your surroundings. Throughout the duration of the spell, your coloration changes instantly to match the background of any new environment you enter, with no effort on your part. This effect grants you a +10 circumstance bonus on Hide checks.  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: Any number of creatures, no two of which are more than 60 ft. apart Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Reaching out to your environment, you wrap your allies in the patterns and shiftingcolorsoftheirsurroundings,concealing them from prying eyes. This spell functions like camouﬂage, except the effect is mobile with the group. The spell is broken for any individual who moves more than 60 feet from the nearest member of the group. (If only two individuals are affected, the one moving away from the other one loses its camouﬂage. If both are moving away from each other, they both become visible when the distance between them exceeds 60 feet.)  CAPRICIOUS ZEPHYR  Evocation [Air] Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 5-ft.-diameter sphere Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None or Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Blowing on your twirling hand, you completethespell,creatingaroilingballofdust and gale-force winds. A ball of swirling wind and dust moves as you direct it, pushing your foes across the battleﬁeld. From its starting point, a capricious zephyr moves 30 feet per round in the direction you point, regardless of the presence or absence of terrain. If the sphere enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for that round and tries to bowl over the creature with its wind force. That creature must resist a bull rush attack from the capricious zephyr, which has a +6 bonus on the check. If the spell wins the bull rush, it pushes the creature as far as it can in a  random direction (roll 1d8; 1 indicates a push into the square closest to you, and 2 through 8 indicate the other squares, moving clockwise around the creature). Any creature pushed by the sphere must succeed on a Reﬂex save or fall prone. A capricious zephyr moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action for you). Otherwise, it merely stays at rest and attempts to bowl over anyone in its square. The spell ends if the distance between the sphere and you ever exceeds the spell’s range.  CAST IN STONE  Transmutation Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None and Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  CAMOUFLAGE  CAMOUFLAGE, MASS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  shield and deﬂection bonuses do not count, nor does its armor bonus for armor worn. A target wearing shoes or other footwear gains a +2 armor bonus to Armor Class (which does count). If the caltrops succeed on the attack, the creature has stepped on one. A successful attack by a caltrop deals 1 point of damage. If the target is Small, Medium, or Large, its land speed is reduced by one-half because of the injury. This movement penalty lasts for 24 hours, until the creature is successfully treated with a DC 15 Heal check, or until it receives at least 1 point of magical healing. A charging or running creature must immediately stop if it steps on a caltrop. Any creature moving at half speed or slower can pick its way through a bed of caltrops with no trouble. The DM judges the effectiveness of caltrops against unusual opponents or opponents outside the size range given above. A giant centipede, for example, can scramble among the caltrops with no chance of hurting itself, and a ﬁre giant wearing thick, massive boots might be immune to their attacks. For every two caster levels beyond 1st, you can affect an additional 5-footby-5-foot square, and the caltrops’ attack bonus increases by 1. Thus, you affect two squares at 3rd level (+1 melee), three at 5th level (+2 melee), four at 7th level (+3 melee), and a maximum of ﬁve at 9th level or higher (+4 melee maximum). Multiple caltrops spells (or mundane caltrops) occupying the same space have no additional effect.  Youreyesbecomelikegraystoneorbstraced with golden veins. The change catches the foesﬁghtingyoubysurprise,andtheyturn to stone. Any creature within 30 feet that meets your gaze is permanently turned into a mindless, inert statue (as ﬂesh to stone), unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save. You can free the victim of your own cast in stone at any time by speaking a command word you establish during the casting. Each creature within range of the gaze must attempt a saving throw against the gaze effect each round at the beginning of its turn. A creature can avert its eyes, which grants a 50% chance to avoid the gaze but in turn grants you concealment relative to it. A creature can close its eyes or turn away entirely; doing so prevents the gaze from affecting it but grants you total concealment from that creature. In addition, you can actively attempt to use the gaze as a standard action each round. To do so, you choose a target within range, and that target must attempt a saving throw. A target that is averting or shutting its eyes gains the above beneﬁts.  43  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Chain missile puts magic missile to shame  CASTIGATE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Cleric 4, paladin 4, Puriﬁcation 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Shoutingyourdeity’steachings,yourebuke your foes with the magic of your sacred words. This spell has no effect on creatures that cannot hear. All creatures whose alignment differs from yours on both the law–chaos and the good–evil axes take 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d4). All creatures whose alignment differs from yours on one component take half damage, and this spell does not deal damage to those who share your alignment.  44  For example, a lawful good cleric who casts this spell deals full damage to any creature that is not lawful and not good, half damage to any creature that is lawful or good (but not both), and no damage to lawful good creatures. A Fortitude saving throw reduces damage by half.  CELEBRATION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [MindAffecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: All creatures in a 15-ft.radius burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a few slurred words and fumbling motions,youcompletethespellandprepare to perform.  You cause any creatures in the area to feel increasingly more intoxicated the longer you perform a drinking song. In the round this spell is cast, all creatures that fail their saving throws take a –2 penalty to Dexterity, Intelligence, and Wisdom. If you use a standard action to continue performing in a second consecutive round, each affected creature must succeed on a second Will saving throw or become nauseated. Succeeding on this saving throw prevents the nausea, and the creature is immune to further effects of this spell. If you use a standard action to continue performing in a third consecutive round, any affected creatures must succeed on a Will save or pass out, becoming unconscious and helpless.  CHAIN MISSILE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)  Target: One creature, plus one more creature/2 levels (each of which must be within 30 ft. of the primary target) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  You can use another creature’s vision instead of your own. While this spell gives you no control over the subject, each time it comes into physical contact with another living being, you can choose to transfer your sensor to the new creature. During your turn in a round, you can use a free action to switch from seeing through the current creature’s eyes to seeing normally or back again. Each transfer attempt allows the new target a saving throw and spell resistance. If a target resists, the spell ends.  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes  Holdingyourhandtoyourhead—indexand middle ﬁngers extended in a V—you call upontheancientpowerofthetriceratops.You touch your intended target,  CHAPTER 1  With the creature’s will to resist brushed aside,yougazeoutfromitseyestoseeyour own satisﬁed smile.  CHARGE OF THE TRICERATOPS  Illus. by J. Nelson  Missiles of magical energy dart from your ﬁngertip to unerringly strike a creature. The missiles strike one creature initially, then spring to other targets. Each missile deals 1d4+1 points of force damage. One missile strikes the primary target per two caster levels, to a maximum of ten missiles (dealing 10d4+10 points of damage). After the missiles strike, they ricochet to a number of targets up to the number of missiles created by the spell. Each secondary target takes 1d4+1 points of damage, as if struck by a single magic missile. You choose secondary targets as you like, but they must all be within 30 feet of the primary target, and no secondary target can be struck more than once. You can choose to affect fewer secondary targets than the maximum (to avoid allies in the area, for example). Missiles without a secondary target do not ricochet off the primary target. Spells, magic items, and abilities that protect against magic missile (such as the shield spell or a brooch of shielding) also protect against this spell. If the primary target has that sort of protection, the spell has no effect against it but still springs to all secondary targets. (A brooch of shielding loses a number of charges equal to the number of missiles hitting the creature—up to ten missiles.) If spell resistance causes the spell to fail to harm the primary target, the spell fails and missiles do not ricochet to additional targets. The missiles strike unerringly, even if the targets are in melee or have anything less then total cover or concealment. You cannot single out speciﬁc parts of a creature to strike. This spell cannot target or damage inanimate objects.  Divination Level: Cleric 3, druid 4, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Bolts of pale blue energy spring forth from your ﬁnger and slam into the desired target. An instant later, the bolts bounce away toward other creatures, slamming into each one.  CHAIN OF EYES  A druid can cast charge of the triceratops on herself, an ally, or an animal companion  45  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  which then grows large horns, a bony skull plate, and a thickened hide. The horns created by this spell grant a natural gore attack that deals 1d8 points of damage (1d6 points of damage if the subject creature is Small, 2d6 if Large). If the gore attack is used as part of a charge, it deals double damage. If the gore attack is used as a primary weapon, the subject adds 1-1/2 times its Strength bonus to the damage of the attack. If it is used as a secondary weapon, the subject adds only 1/2 its Strength bonus to the damage roll, and takes a –5 penalty on the attack roll. The recipient also gains a +4 enhancement bonus to its natural armor.  CHEAT  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, Greed 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: No You rattle the dice in your hand and mutter the words of the spell, then check your facedown cards again. The two low cards have somehow become trumps. At one point during the duration of this spell, you can attempt to alter the outcome of a game of chance. This spell can affect only nonmagical games, such as those using cards or dice. It cannot affect a game involving magic, nor a magic item involved in a game of chance (such as a deck of many things). Whenever a dice roll is made to determine the outcome of the game, a character under the effect of this spell can demand a reroll and take the better of the two rolls. Anyone observing the game of chance is allowed a Will saving throw to realize something ﬁshy is going on, and might suspect that the outcome of the game has been magically altered. For example, Darkon is playing a game that he has a 1 in 4 chance of winning. The DM secretly rolls 1d4  46  and tells the player that Darkon lost. Because Darkon is under the effect of a cheat spell, the player can have the DM reroll. The spell alters probability, so there is no subterfuge that another character could notice (except for the casting of the spell itself). Focus: A pair of dice made from human bones.  CHECKMATE’S LIGHT Evocation [Lawful] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Melee weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You intone your deity’s name and the weapon you touch hums a harmonic response before it lights up with a soothing red glow. You imbue the touched weapon with a +1 enhancement bonus per three caster levels (maximum +5 at 15th level), and it is treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. In addition, you can cause it to cast a red glow as bright as a torch. Any creature within the radius of its clear illumination (20 feet) gets a +1 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects. If the weapon leaves your grasp, the spell effect is suppressed until you or another worshiper of your deity picks it up. Time that passes while the spell’s effects are suppressed counts against the spell’s duration.  CHILL OF THE GRAVE  Necromancy Level: Deathbound 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Apalerayeruptsfromyourpointingﬁnger, and a moaning sound ﬁlls the air as it streaks toward your target.  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The subject takes 1d10 points of cold damage. This damage increases to 2d10 at caster level 4th, 3d10 at caster level 7th, and 4d10 at caster level 10th.  CIRCLE DANCE  Divination Level: Bard 2, cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Youdancetoeachpointofthecompassrose, then ﬁnish the spell in a wide, circular sweep. At the end, you know that the creature you seek lies in the direction you face. You divine the relative direction and condition of another creature. You must have ﬁrsthand knowledge of the creature for the spell to function. If the creature is alive and on the same plane as you, the spell leaves you facing in its direction. You also get an impression of its physical and emotional condition (unharmed, w o u n d e d , unconscious, dying, and so on). If the creature you seek is on a different plane or dead, you feel nothing.  CLARITY OF MIND  Abjuration Level: Balance 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A nimbus of silver rays surrounds the warrior’sheadasyoutouchhimandinvoke the spell’s holy power. His thoughts grow clearer, and he is better able to see through the mind-warping effects of spells. You grant the subject a +4 insight bonus on saving throws against all mind-affecting spells and effects. If the subject of clarity of mind attacks a creature that has concealment and fails  the miss chance roll, he can reroll the miss chance once to see if his attack actually hit the target.  Asilverglowsheathesyourbody asyoucompletethespell.Asthe glowfades,youfeelatouchofthe divine at the back of your mind. This divine touch spreads until youfeelyourconcernsandanxieties fade away.  CLAWS OF THE BEAR  CLAWS OF DARKNESS Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes; see text  You draw material from the Plane of Shadow to cause your hands and forearms toelongateandchangeshapeintofeatureless claws of inky blackness.  The climb walls spell helps make treacherous ascents simple work  When you cast this spell, your hands become shadowy claws. Starting on your next action, you can use the claws to make unarmed attacks as if they were natural weapons. (You attack with one claw and can use the other claw for an off-hand attack. If you have multiple attacks, you use them normally when attacking with the claws.) Attacks with the claws are melee touch attacks. Each claw deals 1d8 points of cold damage. If you grapple an opponent, you deal claw damage with each successful grapple check, and the grappled target is under the effect of a slow spell for as long as you maintain the grapple. An opponent that makes a successful Fortitude save is not slowed, and it cannot be slowed by this casting of claws of darkness. You can extend the claws up to 6 feet, which gives you a natural reach of 10 feet, or retract them as a free action. When the spell is in effect, you cannot cast spells with components other than verbal ones, nor can you carry items with your hands. Any magic items worn on your hands are temporarily absorbed and cease functioning while the spell is active.  CLEAR MIND  Abjuration Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You brush the target with your ﬁnger, and shenowperceiveshandholdsandtoeholds where others see smooth stone. The subject gains a +10 enhancement bonus on Climb checks. The bonus increases to +20 at caster level 5th, and to +30 (the maximum) at caster level 9th. Unlike with spider climb, this spell does not allow the subject to climb on ceilings, and it does not give the creature a climb speed. Material Component: A drop of tree sap or equally sticky material.  Illus. by M. Cotie  When you cast this spell, your hands become natural weapons that deal 1d8 points of damage each or your normal unarmed damage, whichever is greater. You are considered armed while this spell is in effect. If you are Small, your claws deal 1d6 points of damage, and if you are Large, they deal 2d6 points of damage. You add your Strength modiﬁer to your claw damage rolls. Your claws work just like the natural weapons of many monsters. You can make an attack with one claw or a full attack with two claws at your normal attack bonus, replacing your normal attack routine. You take no penalties for two-weapon ﬁghting, and neither attack is a secondary attack. If your base attack bonus is +6 or higher, you do not gain any additional attacks—you simply have two claw attacks at your normal attack bonus.  CLIMB WALLS  CHAPTER 1  Howling a curse at your enemies, pain explodes in your hands as they suddenly sportlongclaws.Almostinstantlythepain fades.Toobadyourfoeswon’tbeabletosay the same.  You gain a +4 sacred bonus on saving throws made against mind-affecting spells and effects.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  CLOAK OF BRAVERY  Abjuration [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 3, Courage 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: 60-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Summoningupyourcourage,youthrowout your arm and sweep it over the area, cloaking all your allies in a glittering mantle of magic that bolsters their bravery.  47  All allies within the emanation (including you) gain a morale bonus on saves against fear effects equal to your caster level (to a maximum of +10 at caster level 10th).  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  CLOAK OF BRAVERY, GREATER Abjuration [Mind-Affecting] Level: Courage 9 Range: 1 mile; see text Area: 1-mile-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 hour/level  This spell functions like cloak of bravery, except all allies within the emanation (including you) are immune to fear effects and gain a +2 morale bonus on attack rolls. Allies who don’t have line of sight to you are unaffected.  CLOAK OF DARK POWER  Abjuration Level: Drow 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A dim gray haze appears around the creature. Light bends around this haze, leaving the creature in a patch of strange and shifting darkness. Cloak of dark power creates a dusky haze around the subject. The haze does not interfere with vision, but the subject and anything it wears or carries is protected from the effects of full sunlight, even under the open, daytime sky of the surface world. A drow subject suffers no blindness or bright illumination combat penalties while under the effect of cloak of dark power. The subject also gains a +4 resistance bonus on saves against light or darkness spells or effects.  CLOAK OF THE SEA  Transmutation Level: Druid 5, sorcerer/wizard 6  48  Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Ablue-greenglowsurroundsyourhandas you complete the spell. With a touch you release it into your intended target, which then turns the same shade of blue-green. While underwater, the subject functions as if affected by blur (PH 206), freedomofmovement(PH233),andwater breathing (PH 300), and doesn’t take nonlethal damage for the duration of the spell. When out of the water (or even partially out), the subject gains none of these advantages except water breathing. The subject can leave and reenter water without ending the spell.  CLOAK POOL  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One color pool Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: No Afewwordsandmotions,andtheswirling colorpoolbecomesassilver-grayastherest of the Astral Plane. This spell causes a color pool on the Astral Plane (DMG 154)—an irregular patch of color containing a portal to another plane—to seemingly cease to exist. In truth, the color pool is only hidden from view. The use of this spell does not hide the area around the pool; it masks only the fact that a pool is present. See invisibility or true seeing reveals the presence of the pool, as does analyze portal.  CLOSE WOUNDS  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourallyfallsfromacrushingblow,butyou don’t have time to reach him. You quickly speak words of power, and the worst of his injuries glow golden and begin to heal. This spell cures 1d4 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +5). If you cast this spell immediately after the subject takes damage, it effectively prevents the damage. It would keep alive someone who had just dropped to –10 hit points, for example, leaving the character at negative hit points but stable. Used against an undead creature, close wounds deals damage instead of curing the creature (which takes half damage if it makes a Will saving throw).  CLOUD OF BEWILDERMENT  Conjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 10-ft. cube Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No Asyouexhalethelastsyllablesoftheincantation,yourbreathformsaninvisiblespray of noxious air. This spell creates a small cloud of nauseating vapors. Any living creature in the area becomes nauseated. This condition lasts as long as the creature is in the cloud and for 1d4+1 rounds after it leaves. Any creature that succeeds on its save but remains in the cloud must continue to save each round on your turn. The cloud obscures sight, including darkvision, providing concealment to creatures within the area or against attacks made through the cloud. Material Component: A rotten egg.  CLOUD WINGS  This spell increases the subject’s ﬂy speed by 30 feet. It has no effect on other modes of movement, nor does it allow the subject to ﬂy if it cannot already do so.  CLOUDBURST  Clouds whirl into existence and, with a peal of thunder, let loose a drenching downpour.  CLUTCH OF ORCUS  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One humanoid Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Reaching out a hand twisted by tension into a grasping claw, you squeeze your foe’s heart from afar, anticipating the moment its smoking remains will rest in your palm. Magical force grips the subject’s heart (or similar vital organ) and begins crushing it. The victim is paralyzed and takes 1d12 points of damage per round. Concentration is required to maintain the spell each round. A conscious victim can attempt a new Fortitude saving throw each round to end the spell. If the victim dies as a result of this spell, its smoking heart appears in your hand.  Illus. by R. Spears  Evocation [Water] Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 100-ft.-radius emanation Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Transmutation Level: Druid 7, Windstorm 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  CHAPTER 1  As you touch the subject, mist forms crude wings that cling to his back.  CLOUD-WALKERS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  COCOON  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 8 The cloud wings spell gives great speed to a ﬂying creature Components: V, S, M, You cause clouds to gather and XP a heavy rain to fall. The rain reduces Withakissblowntoeachsubject,youcreate Casting Time: 1 round visibility ranges by half, resulting in a gaseous pads of cloudstuff on their feet, Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) –4 penalty on Spot and Search checks. allowing them to walk on the clouds. Target: One corpse It automatically extinguishes unproDuration: Instantaneous Each subject of the spell can move tected ﬂames and has a 50% chance Saving Throw: Fortitude negates with a ﬂy speed of 60 feet (perfect of extinguishing protected ﬂames. Spell Resistance: Yes maneuverability), but only outdoors. Ranged weapon attacks and Listen checks take a –4 penalty. Fire damage To touch the earth again, a subject must Thesilkwormcocoondisappearsfromyour in this spell’s area is reduced by 1 point use a standard action to shake off the palm,andsilkthreadscoalescefromthinair per die of damage. cloudstuff, which ends the spell for that aroundyourtarget,quicklywrappingabout This spell does not function indoors, the body until it is fully encased. creature. You can dismiss the spell, but underground, underwater, or in desert only for all subjects at once—an act climates. After the spell ends, the water that can have signiﬁcant consequences When cast upon a deceased creature created evaporates over the next 10 for subjects already in the air. (whose death can be no less recent than 1 round per caster level), this spell minutes. The water created with this preserves the body and begins a slow spell does not slake thirst or provide process of rebirth. If the corpse is raised, any nourishment to plants.  49  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  resurrected, or reincarnated at any point during the next week, the creature takes no level loss or Constitution loss normally associated with such spells. At the conclusion of the week, if the subject has not been returned to life, the creature is automatically reincarnated, as the spell, with no loss of level or Constitution. Material Component: A silkworm cocoon. XP Cost: 250 XP  COLD FIRE  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One ﬁre source (up to a 20-ft. cube) or one creature; see text Duration: 1 minute/level (D) (ﬁre source) or Instantaneous (creature) Saving Throw: No (ﬁre source) or Fortitude half (creature) Spell Resistance: No (ﬁre source) or Yes (creature) As you complete the spell you widen your eyes slightly at the ﬁre you wish to affect. Its ﬂames instantly turn a blue-white. The air between you and the ﬁre feels much colder. You are able to change the normal ﬂames of a ﬁre (any blaze that lasts for more than 1 round) into cold ﬂames. Affected ﬂames deal cold damage to creatures that come into contact with them. The spell can also affect magical ﬁres such as those generated by a wall of ﬁre, provided the affected ﬁre is small enough. Cold ﬁre ﬂames burn blue and white for the duration of the spell. If the target is a creature with the ﬁre subtype or vulnerability to cold, the spell deals 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to the creature, but has no further effect.  COLD SNAP  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 6, druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 1 mile  50  Area: 1-mile-radius circle centered on you Duration: 2d4 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you call upon divine power to fuel your spell, you feel the air around you become chilled. The drop in temperature creates a thin fog that exacerbates the cold in the air without hindering your vision or movement whatsoever. This spell causes a powerful cold front to form, lowering the temperature in the affected area by 5 degrees Fahrenheit per caster level (maximum change of 50 degrees Fahrenheit), to a maximum low of –20 degrees Fahrenheit (see Cold Dangers, DMG 302). Spells with the cold descriptor deal an extra 1 point of damage per die when cast in the area.  COMBUST  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Touched creature or combustible object that weighs no more than 25 lb./level Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: Yes You rub the oil against the ﬂint and murmur the ancient words, touching your target. It immediately smolders and then bursts into bright ﬂames. This spell makes a combustible object or a creature’s combustible equipment burst into ﬂame, even if damp. If the target is a creature, the initial eruption of ﬂame causes 1d8 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d8) with no saving throw. Further, the creature must make a DC 15 Reﬂex save or catch ﬁre (DMG 303). If the target is a combustible, unattended object, the initial eruption of ﬂame deals ﬁre damage to the object as noted above. The object catches ﬁre and takes 1d6 points of ﬁre damage each round until consumed or someone puts out the ﬁre. Material Component: A drop of oil and a piece of ﬂint.  COMETFALL  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 6, druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 400-pound ball of rock and ice Area: 5-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No Youconjureabright,glowingcomet,which appearsinmidairaboveyourenemies,then strikes the ground with tremendous force and a thunderous boom. You conjure a comet that immediately falls to the ground, dealing 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) to everything in the area. The force of the comet can also knock creatures over. Creatures who fail their Reﬂex save are knocked prone. A creature that succeeds on its saving throw takes half damage from the comet and is not knocked down. The comet breaks apart on impact, ﬁlling the 10-foot-square area with dense rubble (DMG 90). You must cast this spell in an area with at least 40 feet of vertical space above the point of impact. If you do not have 40 feet of space, the spell fails.  CONE OF DIMNESS  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Splaying your ﬁngers, you call upon the energies that dwell within the shadowy places of the world. Your arm shakes with barely contained power, causing a translucent gray cone to burst forth from your outstretched hand. Creatures in the cone must succeed on a Will save or believe darkness has engulfed them, rendering them blinded. A creature that makes its initial Will save suffers no ill effects.  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  CONTAGION, MASS  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 5, druid 5, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Forcingahackingcough,youcompletethe spell. In the area you’ve designated, you see swirling red and black mist rise up, accompanied by the distant sound of your echoing cough. This spell functions like contagion (PH 213), but all creatures within the area are infected.  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Cleric 7  Greater consumptive ﬁeld snuffs out the lives of the weak and grants tremendous power to evil clerics  Illus. by R. Horsley  Sweeping your arm about and clutching it to your chest, you draw the last breaths of fallen foes from their choking mouths and inhale them to fuel your own power.  CONSUMPTIVE FIELD, GREATER  This spell functions like consumptive ﬁeld, except that the ﬁeld affects all creatures in the area with 9 hit points or fewer. Such creatures that fail their saving throws die, and creatures that fall to 9 hit points or lower in the area after the spell is cast are likewise subject to its effect.  CHAPTER 1  CONSUMPTIVE FIELD  All creatures in the area with fewer than 0 hit points that fail their saving throws die, and you gain 1d8 temporary hit points and a +2 bonus to Strength for each death caused by this spell and until the spell’s duration expires. Additionally, your effective caster level increases by one per death caused by this spell, to a maximum increase of half your original caster level, improving spell effects that are dependent on caster level. (This increase in effective caster level does not grant you access to more spells, and it does not increase the duration of this spell.) Creatures that fall to –1 hit points or lower in the area after the spell is cast are likewise subject to its effect. No creature can be affected by this spell more than once per casting, regardless of the number of times that the area of the spell passes over them.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A creature that fails its initial save can attempt a new saving throw each round until it succeeds or the spell expires. Failing the subsequent saving throws results in continued blindness. Success on a later save means the creature feels its vision beginning to clear, although its vision remains dim and hazy for the remainder of the spell. This results in a 20% miss chance for any attack the creature makes.  51  CONTAGIOUS FOG  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spitting the last phrase of the spell, you throw out your arm, and a brown mist whirls into being around your foes. This spell functions like fog cloud (PH 232), except as noted here. Each round that a creature is within the fog, it must make a Fortitude save or contract a disease equivalent to the shakes (DMG 292), which strikes immediately (no incubation period). A creature afﬂicted with this disease takes 1d8 points of Dexterity damage immediately, and each day that the disease persists, it must make a DC 13 Fortitude save or take another 1d8 points of Dexterity damage. The fog moves away from you at 10 feet per round, rolling along the surface of the ground or water. (Figure out the cloud’s new spread each round based on its new center, which is 10 feet farther away from the point of origin where you cast the spell.) Because the vapors are heavier than air, they sink to the lowest level of the surface over which they move, pouring down sinkhole openings, and even down through minute cracks. Contagious fog cannot penetrate liquids, nor can it be cast underwater. Material Component: A used handkerchief.  CONTAGIOUS TOUCH  Necromancy Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Holding out your hand like it’s dead, you croakoutmagicwordsandimbueyourlimb with a terrible disease. Upon casting this spell, you choose one disease from this list: blinding sickness, cackle fever, ﬁlth fever, mindﬁre,  52  red ache, the shakes, or slimy doom (DMG 292). Any living creature you hit with a melee touch attack during the spell’s duration is affected as though by the contagion spell, immediately contracting the disease you have selected unless it makes a successful Fortitude save. You cannot infect more than one creature per round.  CONTINGENT ENERGY RESISTANCE Abjuration Level: Cleric 4, druid 4, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  Asyouﬁnishchantingthewords,apearlescentﬁlmcoversyourbodybeforefadinginto yourskin,apalerainbowofcolorsoffering their protection against potential damage to come. This spell functions similarly to contingency (PH 213), but with a more limited scope. While contingent energy resistance is in effect, if you are dealt damage associated with one of the ﬁve types of energy (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic), the spell automatically grants you resistance 10 against that type of energy for up to 10 minutes per caster level, or until the remainder of the spell’s duration, just as if you were under the effect of a resist energy spell of the appropriate type. Once the energy type protected against by a particular casting of this spell is determined, it can’t be changed. You can’t have more than one contingent energy resistance in effect on yourself at the same time—if you cast the spell a second time while an earlier casting is still in effect, the earlier spell automatically expires. The energy resistance granted by this spell does not stack with similar beneﬁts against the same energy type (such as from the resist energy spell). However, it is possible to be simultaneously under the effect of resist energy (ﬁre) and contingent energy resistance (electricity), or any other two such spells that protect against different types of energy. Material Component: An oyster shell.  CONVICTION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You hold the holy passage in your hand and touch your ally, intoning the spell. A sea-blue nimbus of light blossoms about his head and shoulders, strengthening his resolve. This spell bolsters the mental, physical, and spiritual strength of the creature touched. The spell grants the subject a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, with an additional +1 to the bonus for every six caster levels you have (maximum +5 morale bonus at 18th level). Material Component: A small parchment with a bit of holy text written upon it.  CONVICTION, MASS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allies in a 20-ft.-radius burst You hold the holy passage aloft and invoke the power of its words. Around you, your friends are bathed in a sea-blue nimbus of light. This spell functions like conviction, except that it affects multiple allies at a distance.  CORONA OF COLD  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes As you complete the spell you feel your extremities turn ice cold, numb, and slug-  gish.Thefeelingsubsidesasthecolddrains away from your body into the air around you,causingyourbreathtoemergeaswhite puffs in the now-chill air.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You brush your ﬁngers against the enemy, and immediately his bones begin to soften until he ﬂows down into a ﬂesh-colored puddle. Your touch transforms a living creature into a spongy, amorphous mass, its shape melting and writhing uncontrollably. An affected creature is unable to hold or use any item. Soft or misshapen feet and legs reduce speed to 10 feet, or one-quarter normal, whichever is less (minimum 5 feet). The victim becomes blinded and cannot cast spells or use magic items, and searing pain renders it incapable of attacking. While in this form, the creature has immunity to extra damage from critical hits and sneak attacks due to its amorphous nature. A conscious victim can regain its own shape by taking a standard  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ghostly hand and candle Duration: 1 minute/level (D); see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youholdoutapieceofﬂeshbeforeyou,and as you concentrate on your desired spell effect,theﬂeshdissolvesintonothingness. Nearby, in the place of your choosing, a severed hand appears bearing a lit candle. The ghostly hand carries a lit candle that sheds light in a 5-foot radius. You can move the hand at the beginning of your turn as you desire—forward or back, up or down, straight or around corners—up to 50 feet per round. Directing the candle is a free action. The hand and candle are incorporeal and can pass through objects. A corpse candle illuminates hidden, ethereal, and invisible beings and items, all of which become faintly visible as wispy outlines. Ethereal creatures remain unreachable from the Material Plane (except with force effects), but illuminated incorporeal and invisible creatures do not beneﬁt from concealment, and so attacks against them suffer no miss chance. The hand cannot be attacked or damaged, though dispel magic and similar spells can dispel it. The hand winks out if the distance between you and it exceeds the spell’s range. Material Component: A piece of a corpse untreated by any kind of preservative.  CORROSIVE GRASP  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action  Your hand glistens and smokes from a viscouscoatingofacid.Itdoesnotharmyou, but your opponents are less fortunate. A touch attack with this hand causes 1d8 points of acid damage. You can use this melee touch attack up to one time per level. You can also deal this damage as extra damage with an unarmed strike or an attack with a natural weapon. If you grapple an opponent, you can deal this damage in addition to other damage you deal with a successful grapple check.  CHAPTER 1  CORPOREAL INSTABILITY  CORPSE CANDLE  Range: Touch Targets: Creatures touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You are surrounded by a protective aura of cold that also causes damage to others within its radius. You gain resistance to ﬁre 10. Starting in the round you cast the spell, corona of cold also deals 1d12 points of cold damage each round at the beginning of your turn to all other creatures within the area. A successful save prevents the damage caused by the spell in that round, but does not prevent damage in future rounds. Creatures damaged by the spell shiver uncontrollably, taking a –2 penalty to their Strength and Dexterity and moving at half speed for as long as they remain within the area; these penalties do not stack with consecutive rounds of damage or additional corona of cold spells.  action to attempt a new save in any later round. Success ends the spell effect. Each round the victim spends in an amorphous state, it takes 1 point of Wisdom drain from mental shock. If the victim’s Wisdom is reduced to 0, it falls unconscious.  COUNTERMOON  Abjuration Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One lycanthrope Duration: 12 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (D) Spell Resistance: Yes Translucent red chains ﬂy from your outstretched hand to wrap around the target before fading away. This spell forces a lycanthrope back to its natural form and keeps it from changing form, preventing both voluntary shapechanging through the alternate form ability and involuntary shapechanging because of lycanthropy. Material Component: A hair, scale, or other cast-off item from the type of creature.  CRABWALK  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  53  Corpse candle sometimes reveals things you wish you hadn’t seen  The creature you touch now moves much faster, scuttling about with disconcerting ease.  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  This spell creates a number of tentacles that surround you but do not interfere with your movement or spellcasting. They provide concealment and completely hide your features. You gain a +4 competence bonus on grapple checks, Climb checks, and Escape Artist checks. When you are attacked, the tentacles strike back at your attacker. They have an attack bonus equal to your base attack bonus + your Wis modiﬁer, and a successful attack deals 1d12 points of damage.  CREAKING CACOPHONY  Illusion (Figment) [Sonic] Level: Bard 3, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Noise swells into a cacophonous din, as if hundredsofintertwinedtreesandbranches  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You ﬁnish the last detail and lean back to lookatyourwork.Thetattoolooksgood.It should prove useful. This spell creates a single magic tattoo. You determine the exact type of tattoo, though the selection is limited by your caster level, as indicated below. You must possess a modicum of artistic talent to sketch the desired tattoo—at least 1 rank of Craft (drawing), Craft (painting), Craft (calligraphy), or a similar Craft skill. Inscribing a magic tattoo requires a successful Craft check. The DC varies with the kind of tattoo, as noted below. If you are a 3rd- to 6th-level caster, you can inscribe a tattoo that generates any one of the following effects (Craft DC 10). • +2 resistance bonus on one type of saving throw (Fortitude, Reﬂex, or Will). • +1 luck bonus on attack rolls. • +1 deﬂection bonus to AC.  When your caster level reaches 13th, you can add the following to the list of tattoos you can inscribe (Craft DC 20). • Spell resistance equal to 10 + 1 per three caster levels. • +2 enhancement bonus to any one ability score. • +1 spellcaster level. This effect increases the subject’s effective level, but not the total number of spells. For example, an 11th-level caster who receives this tattoo functions as a 12th-level caster for the purpose of determining level-based spell variables (such as range, area, effect, and so on), but he does not receive any extra spells. A single creature can have only three magic tattoos at a time. Any attempt to apply more than that automatically fails. A successful erase spell removes a single magic tattoo. A successful dispel magic spell can remove multiple magic tattoos if targeted on the creature bearing them. Material Components: Tattoo inks in appropriate colors costing at least 100 gp. Focus: Tattoo needles.  Illus. by C. Dien  Ashroudofdark,writhingtentaclesforms around your body as you speak the spell’s ﬁnal syllables.  CREATE MAGIC TATTOO  • +2 resistance bonus on saving throws. • +2 competence bonus on attack rolls.  CHAPTER 1  CRAWLING DARKNESS  The sound from this spell is as loud as a pitched battle and is audible far beyond the spell’s area. Outside the spell’s area, the sound is merely loud. Inside the spell’s area, the sound is overwhelming. All creatures within the spell’s area take a –4 penalty on Listen checks. Spellcasters are distracted and must make a Concentration check to cast any spell (DC equals this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). A creaking cacophony spell enhances and focuses sonic energy. Creatures in the area that do not have immunity to sonic damage gain vulnerability to sonic damage.  At 7th to 12th caster level, you can add the following tattoos to the list that you can inscribe (Craft DC 15).  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  When the subject of this spell charges, it gains a +4 bonus on its attack roll and takes no penalty to Armor Class. This beneﬁt replaces the normal +2 bonus on attack rolls and –2 penalty to AC that a charge attack normally confers. If the creature is capable of multiple attacks after a charge, such as a lion with the pounce ability, the bonus applies only to the ﬁrst attack. Material Component: A crab’s leg.  were rubbing together in a chaotic medley of groans and creaks.  CREEPING COLD  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 3 rounds Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Reaching out your hand and making a crushing motion, you turn the subject’s sweattoice,creatingblistersastheiceforms on and inside the skin.  55  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject takes 1d6 cumulative points of cold damage per round (that is, 1d6 on the 1st round, 2d6 on the second, and 3d6 on the third). Only one save is allowed against the spell; if successful, it halves the damage each round. Focus: A small glass or pottery vessel worth at least 25 gp ﬁlled with ice, snow, or water.  CREEPING COLD, GREATER Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 4 Duration: See text  This spell is the same as creeping cold, but the duration increases by 1 round, during which the subject takes 4d6 points of cold damage. If you are at least 15th level, the spell lasts for 5 rounds and deals 5d6 points of cold damage. If you are at least 20th level, the spell lasts for 6 rounds and deals 6d6 points of cold damage.  CRITICAL STRIKE  Divination Level: Assassin 1, bard 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Upon uttering the ancient phrase that completes the spell, you feel the weapon in your hand drawn toward a creature standing nearby. Whenever you make a melee attack against a ﬂanked foe or against a foe denied its Dexterity bonus, you deal an extra 1d6 points of damage, your weapon’s threat range is doubled (as if under the effect of keen edge), and you gain a +4 insight bonus on rolls made to conﬁrm critical threats. The increased threat range granted by this spell doesn’t stack with any other effect that increases your weapon’s threat range. Creatures immune to extra damage from sneak attacks are immune to the extra damage dealt by your attacks.  56  CROWN OF GLORY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Glory 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: 20 ft. Targets: You and one creature/level in a 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Whenyoucastthisspell,youcrownyourself with your deity’s favor and draw all eyes toward you. You are imbued with an aura of celestial authority, inspiring awe in all lesser creatures that behold your terrible perfection and righteousness. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Charisma for the duration of the spell. In addition, the subject creatures gain a +4 morale bonus on attack rolls, saves, and skill checks, immunity to fear effects, and temporary hit points equal to your caster level (maximum 20).  CRUMBLE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One structure or construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) With a ﬁnal word and gesture, time takes controloftheobject,erodingitawaybefore your eyes, aging it several centuries in a few seconds. You bring the forces of erosion to bear on a fabricated structure such as a stone bridge, a wooden building, an iron wall, a construct, or any other object not formed by nature itself. The erosion deals 1d8 points of damage per caster level to the object (hardness does not apply) to a maximum of 10d8. The maximum size of  the object affected depends on your level. If you cast this spell on an object of greater size than you can affect, the spell fails. Level Up to 9th 10th–15th 16th–18th 19th–20th  Size of Object Affected Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  CURSE OF ILL FORTUNE Transmutation Level: Blackguard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Lettinglooseastreamoffoulincantations, you curse the subject. You place a temporary curse upon the subject, giving it a –3 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks. Curse of ill fortune is negated by any spell that removes a bestow curse spell.  CURSE OF ILL FORTUNE, MASS Necromancy Level: Cleric 5 Targets: Enemies in a 20-ft.-radius burst  This spell functions like curse of ill fortune, except that it affects multiple enemies.  CURSE OF IMPENDING BLADES  Necromancy Level: Bard 2, ranger 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  You grip the nail-pierced hunk of leather and cast the spell. A small black dagger jets from the tip of the nail and strikes your opponent squarely in the chest.  Necromancy Level: Bard 3, ranger 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Targets: Enemies in a 20-ft.-radius burst This spell functions like curse of impending blades, except that it affects multiple enemies.  CURSE OF LYCANTHROPY  Necromancy Level: Pestilence 6 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Humanoid touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Dipping your hand in blood and then grippingthetargetﬁercely,youcallonthecurse of lycanthropy to destroy your foe. If the target fails its saving throw, it dies, and 1d6 wererats (in wererat form; MM 173) claw their way out of its body. The wererats do not attack you or your allies, but might attack nearby living creatures. If no target is available, the wererats scurry away to spread their lycanthropy. Material Component: A pint of animal blood.  CURSED BLADE Necromancy Level: Assassin 4  A weapon affected by this spell deals wounds that can’t be healed in the usual fashion. Any damage dealt by the weapon (not including damage from special weapon properties such as ﬂaming, holy, wounding, and so on) cannot be cured by any means until the damaged individual has received a remove curse spell (or some other effect that neutralizes a curse). If a creature is slain by a weapon that is under the effect of this spell, it can’t be raised from the dead unless a remove curse spell (or similar effect) is cast on the body or a true resurrection spell is used.  CUTTING HAND  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: Your hand Duration: 1 round/level (D) Yourhandtinglesasasmooth,metallicedge extrudesfromtheoutsideofyourpalmand curls up along your ﬁngertips, forming a ﬂexible, razor-sharp blade. You alter the structure of your hand so that it becomes as hard and sharp as a blade. Your hand deals 1d6 points of damage (1d4 if you are Small, and 1d8 if you are Large) and gains a +2 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls. You are considered armed with this hand. Your hand’s enhancement bonus does not apply to melee touch attacks.  CYCLONIC BLAST  Evocation [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  Cuppingachild’stop,youforcefullythrust yourhandforward,simultaneouslyspeaking the ﬁnal words of the spell’s proscribed formula. Immediately thereafter, a blast of whirling wind issues forth from your outstretchedﬁngers,sweepingupwithinit all who stand in its way. You send a twisting torrent of wind, not unlike a tornado turned on its side, toward your enemies. A cyclonic blast deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6 points of damage) to all creatures and objects in the area. Objects bigger than Large take half damage. The cyclonic blast begins at your ﬁngertips. Creatures who fail their Reﬂex saving throws against a cyclonic blast are additionally in danger of being knocked back by the force of the wind. Treat this as a bull rush attack made with a +12 bonus on the Strength check. The cyclonic blast always moves with the opponent to push that target back the full distance allowed, and (unlike a normal bull rush) you can exceed your normal movement limit with a sufﬁciently high check result. Airborne creatures are treated as if they were one size category smaller for the purpose of resisting the bull rush. If the damage caused to an interposing barrier by the blast shatters or breaks through it, the cyclonic blast can continue beyond the barrier if the spell’s range permits; otherwise, it stops at the barrier just as any other spell effect does. Focus: A child’s spinning top.  CHAPTER 1  CURSE OF IMPENDING BLADES, MASS  Drawingupondarkpowers,youwhispera vehementcurseanddrawyourﬁngerdown the weapon.  Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The target of the spell has a hard time avoiding attacks, sometimes even seeming to stumble into harm’s way. The subject takes a –2 penalty to AC. The curse cannot be dispelled, but it can be removed with a break enchantment,limitedwish,miracle,removecurse, or wish spell. Arcane Material Component: A nail through a piece of leather.  Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: One melee weapon Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  DAGGERSPELL STANCE Abjuration Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  The daggers in your hands glow silver as you complete the spell. They feel as if they have become a part of your body.  57  Illus. by R. Horsley  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  While this spell is in effect, if you make a full attack while holding a dagger in each hand, you gain a +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls made with daggers in that round. The magical energy that permeates your daggers while this spell is active allows you to deﬂect the magical energy of spells. When wielding two daggers and ﬁghting defensively, you gain spell resistance equal to 5 + your caster level. The spell focuses your concentration so that when you devote all of your attention to defense, you can turn the force of most blows away from your body with your daggers. When wielding two daggers and using the total defense action, you gain both the spell resistance beneﬁt described above and damage reduction 5/magic. Focus: A pair of daggers.  DANCE OF THE UNICORN  Abjuration Level: Druid 5, Puriﬁcation 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 5 ft./level Area: 5 ft./level-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Whirling your pointed ﬁnger through a complexgesture,youcreateacoolandfresh mist that cleanses the air of pollutants. You surround yourself with a purifying, swirling mist that washes the air clean of smoke, dust, and poisons. Nonmagical contaminants, including inhaled poisons, are automatically negated within the cloud. Dance of the unicorn also grants everyone within the mist a +4 bonus on saving throws against magical or supernatural gas effects, such as acid fog, cloudkill, and green dragon breath. The cloud of mist leaves everything within its area damp.  58  on a dark way without penalty, since it is no more slippery than a typical dungeon ﬂoor. A dark way can support a maximum of 200 pounds per caster level. Creatures that cause the total weight on a dark way to exceed this limit fall through it as if it weren’t there. You never fall through a dark way unless your own weight exceeds the spell’s maximum capacity.  DARKBOLT  Evocation [Darkness] Level: Darkness 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One ray/2 levels (maximum seven rays) Du ration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Daggerspell stance turns its caster into a deadly dervish  DARK WAY  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Bard 2, cleric 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One bridge of force 5 ft. wide, 1 in. thick, and up to 20 ft./level long Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You stand at the edge of the canyon and invokethepower.Atyourfeetappearsathin black bridge that arches over the canyon. You create a ribbonlike, weightless, unbreakable bridge. A dark way must be anchored at both ends to solid objects, but otherwise can be at any angle. Like a wall of force (PH 298), it must be continuous and unbroken when formed. It is typically used to cross a chasm or a hazardous space. Creatures can move  With a quick invocation to your deity, you call forth a nimbus of jet-black night. This terrible radiance, laced with the will of your deity, allows you to shoot black bolts of power. You unleash beams of darkness from your open palm. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to strike your target. You can hurl one bolt for every two caster levels you have (maximum seven bolts). You can hurl all the bolts at once, or you can hurl one bolt per round as a free action, starting in the round when you cast the spell. You do not have to hurl a bolt in every round, but if you don’t hurl the bolt you were entitled to in a round, it is lost. If you hurl all the bolts at once, all your targets must be within 60 feet of each other. A darkbolt deals 2d8 points of damage to a living creature, and the creature is dazed for 1 round unless it makes a Will save (a creature struck by multiple bolts during the same round is dazed for a maximum of 1 round, no matter how many times it fails its save). An undead creature takes no damage, but is dazed if it fails its save.  DARKFIRE  Evocation [Fire] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Flame in your palm Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  DARKVISION, MASS  Abjuration Level: Druid 0, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 15 ft. Target: All creatures in a 15-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) With a cry similar to a rooster’s you cast the spell. For a moment you feel as if you had just awakened from a comfortable nap, but as the feeling fades, those around you begin to stir. All sleeping creatures in the affected area awaken. Those who are unconscious because of nonlethal damage wake up and are staggered. This spell does not affect dying creatures.  DEAD END  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Assassin 1, bard 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level touched Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) or Will disbelief (if interacted with); see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Range: 10 ft. Targets: Allies in a 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you  Sprinklingspiceontheground,youcomplete theﬁnalstepofthespell.Upontouchingyour intendedtargets,younotewithsatisfaction that the area around all of you seems a little cleaner and less tread upon.  Asyouconcludethespell’scasting,youare aware of being able to see without light. A glance at your allies show that they too perceive more than before.  This spell ﬂawlessly disguises the spoor left by the subjects, concealing their tracks, scent, and other signs of their passage with an illusion that defeats even the senses of taste and touch. Any creature making a Search check, using the scent ability, or using the Survival skill to track a creature affected by this spell interacts with the illusion  This spell functions like darkvision (PH 216), except that all target creatures receive the spell’s beneﬁts. Unlike with darkvision, recipients of this spell  DEADFALL  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: Mass of dead wood forming in a cylinder (20-ft. radius, 40 ft. high); see text Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Dark ﬂames appear in your hand. You can hurl them or use them to touch enemies. The ﬂames appear in your open hand and harm neither you nor your equipment. They emit no light but produce the same amount of heat as an actual ﬁre. Beginning the following round, you can strike opponents with a melee touch attack, dealing 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). Alternatively, you can hurl the ﬂames up to 120 feet as a thrown weapon. When doing so, you make a ranged touch attack (with no range penalty) and deal the same damage as with the melee attack. No sooner do you hurl the ﬂames than a new set appears in your hand. The darkﬁre is invisible to normal vision but can be seen with darkvision as easily as a normal ﬂame can be seen in darkness (this means that darkﬁre can be used as a signal or beacon for creatures with darkvision). The spell does not function underwater.  DAWN  and can make a Will save to disbelieve. Creatures that succeed on the save can detect the subjects normally. Creatures merely passing through an area the subjects passed through do not count as interacting with the illusion. Targets of this spell can make a Will save to negate it, and spell resistance applies. Material Component: A pinch of some odoriferous spice.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Yourhandfeelswarmcuppingtheeldritch ﬂames. You cannot see the ﬁre in the shadows, but you know it is there, as will those who will soon feel the hungry ﬂames.  cannot have the ability made permanent with a permanency spell. Material Component: A dried carrot or three small agates.  Withtheﬁnalwordofthespellyoucallinto being a huge tower of logs and branches. It collapsestothegroundwitharoar,crushing creatures beneath its weight. Pick a point on the ground as the center of the radius and bottom of the cylinder. Deadfall creates a tangled mass of huge branches, logs, and fallen trees on the ground. The deadfall immediately collapses in on itself with terriﬁc force and noise. Creatures and objects in the area take 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6). In addition, creatures in the area must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be knocked prone. Once you cast the spell, a considerable volume of dead wood remains behind. This pile of brush is 5 feet high, with a 20-foot radius, and it counts as dense rubble (DMG 90).  DEAFENING CLANG  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Your weapon Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  59  Illus. by J. Jarvis  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  At your touch, the weapon rings like a struck tuning fork. The sound diminishes untilit’simperceptible,butwhenyoutouch the weapon you can feel the vibration. You empower the touched weapon with magic that causes it to emit a loud clang when it is struck against a hard surface, such as a ﬂoor, wall, or creature. The weapon deals 1d6 points of sonic damage with each successful hit, and any creature struck by the weapon must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or be deafened for 1 minute.  DEATH ARMOR  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Yousmearyourselfwithwhitepaste,drawingaskullonyourbareﬂesh.Immediately, a wreath of black ﬂames crackles to life around you. The black ﬂames created by this spell injure creatures that contact them. Any  The deadfall spell crushes the life fromits victims  creature striking you with its body or handheld weapons takes 1d4 points of damage +1 point per two caster levels (maximum +10). If the creature has spell resistance, it applies to the damage. Weapons with reach, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in this way. Material Component: Paste made from ground bones. Focus: An onyx worth 50 gp.  DEATH DRAGON  Necromancy [Evil, Fear, MindAffecting] Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Effect: Dragon-shaped armor of energy and bones Duration: 1 round/level (D) Yousummonunholypowertogirdyourself in a dragon-shaped cocoon of bones and negative energy. The cocoon created by this spell gives you a +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor and a +4 deﬂection bonus to Armor Class. You are treated as armed when you make unarmed attacks, and you deal damage as if your limbs were short swords of an appropriate size. You can use your off hand to attack, incurring the standard two-weapon ﬁghting penalties (PH 160). The cocoon prevents you from casting spells with  somatic, material, or focus (but not divine focus) components, but does not otherwise hinder your actions or movement. As a standard action, you can project a cone of fear or make a melee touch attack to use inﬂict critical wounds on the creature touched (the caster level of these effects equals your own). These effects are otherwise identical to the spells of the same names, but have saving throw DCs equal to what this spell’s save DC would be if the spell allowed a save.  DEATH PACT  Necromancy Level: Cleric 8, Pact 8 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched Duration: Permanent until triggered Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With the last words of power, you make theconvert’soathbindingandensureyour deity’s aid when the worst befalls his new servant. This spell allows the target to enter into a binding agreement with your deity that brings the target back to life if it is slain. When this spell is cast, the subject’s Constitution is permanently lowered by 2 points. In exchange for this, if the subject should die, a true resurrection spell (PH 296) is immediately cast upon the subject. However, the resurrected creature does not regain the 2 Constitution points when returned to life. If the spell is dispelled before the subject dies, it does not regain its 2 lost Constitution points. A wish or miracle spell can return the lost Constitution, but only after the death pact has been activated or dispelled. Material Component: A diamond worth at least 1,000 gp.  DEATH THROES  Necromancy [Force] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S  60  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level or until you are killed Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Youﬁnishthespell,andmysticduplicatesof youandyouralliesappearaheadofyou.As you move forward, they set out as well.  DEATH WARD, MASS  This spell functions like death ward (PH 217), except as noted above.  DECOMPOSITION  Necromancy Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 50 ft. Area: Living enemies within a 50-ft.radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Using your link to the natural world, you createanairofdecaythatmakesdeathcome quicker to the wounded. Whenever an enemy within the area takes normal (not nonlethal) damage, that wound festers for an additional 3  The deep breath spell gives Mialee some conﬁdence she’ll survive being dragged beneath the water by the sahuagin  stopped, however, any new wound taken while the subject is within the area (before the spell expires) begins the process anew. For example, a subject who takes 6 points of damage from an attack while within the area of a decomposition spell takes 3 points of damage from the festering wound in the next round, and another 3 points in the round after that. In the following round, that subject receives 4 points of healing from a cure light wounds spell, so the festering stops and the subject takes no festering damage that round. In the next round, the subject remains within the emanation and takes another 3 points of damage in battle. The festering begins again, dealing 3 points of festering damage in the following round.  In order to ﬂush ambushes, you project a duplicate image of yourself and your companions. This spell creates an illusion complete with visual images, sounds (including speech), smells, textures, and temperature. It mimics exactly what you and any of your allies within 50 feet of you do. If the terrain differs signiﬁcantly between that of the illusion and that of the characters, or if any character takes an action the illusion can’t duplicate (for instance, climbing a tree if none are present for the illusory duplicate to mimic) onlookers automatically receive a saving throw. In addition, anyone who moves out of the spell’s area disappears from the illusion.  Illus. by R. Spears  Necromancy Level: Cleric 8, druid 9 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/ level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  Sensingthesparkoflifeinyourallies through your magic, you bolster that spark and protect it from harm.  Illusion (Figment) Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: Figment that mimics you and all allies within 50 ft. of you Duration: 8 hours (D) Saving Throw: Will disbelief; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  If you are killed, your body is instantaneously destroyed in an explosion that deals 1d8 points of damage per caster level to everyone in a 30-foot-radius burst. This explosion destroys your body, preventing any form of raising or resurrection that requires part of the corpse. A wish, miracle, or true resurrection spell can restore life.  DECOY IMAGE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  As the killing blow falls, you smile with grim satisfaction even as the light of life fades, knowing that your enemy will soon be joining you in the afterlife.  points of damage at the beginning of its turn each round thereafter for the duration of the spell. A DC 15 Heal check or the application of any cure spell or other healing magic stops the festering. Only one wound festers at a time; additional wounds taken while the ﬁrst is still festering are not subject to this effect. Once festering has been  DEEP BREATH  Conjuration (Creation) [Air] Level: Druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You let out a quick cry and instantly feel your chest swell with air, as if you had taken a deep breath. Strangely, you feel no need to exhale. Your lungs instantly ﬁll with air, and continue to reﬁll with air for the duration of the spell. When the spell’s duration expires, you can continue  61  to hold your breath as if you had just gulped down a lungful of air. You can cast this spell with an instant utterance, quickly enough to save yourself from drowning after being suddenly plunged into water.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DEEPER DARKVISION  Transmutation Level: Ranger 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  and strike a creature or object you indicate as a ranged touch attack. Any creature struck by the sphere takes 3d6 points of damage from the force of its winds. In addition, Medium or smaller creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked prone. Creatures that fall prone must then succeed on a second Fortitude save or be swept up by the sphere and driven 1d8×10 feet into the air, dropping 1d6 squares from their original position in a random direction and taking falling damage as normal. If a window is within range,  Illus. by W. England  DEFENESTRATING SPHERE  62  When you cast this spell, you create a violently swirling sphere of air. As a move action, you can make the sphere travel up to 30 feet per round  Necromancy Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  You afﬂict the target with a horrible, desiccating curse that deals 1d6 points of Constitution damage, plus 1 additional point of Constitution damage per three caster levels, to a maximum of 1d6+5 at 15th level. Oozes, plants, and creatures with the aquatic subtype are more susceptible to this spell than other targets. Such creatures take 1d8 points of Constitution damage, plus 1 additional point of Constitution damage per three caster levels, to a maximum of 1d8+5.  The subject gains the ability to see 90 feet in total darkness and ignores the 20% miss chance normally present in shadowy illumination (such as might be created by a darkness spell). Deeper darkvision is black and white only but otherwise similar to normal sight. Material Component: A pinch of dried carrot or an agate.  From the pearl you hold between your thumb and ring ﬁnger erupts a cloudy gray sphere of whirling air and howling wind that ﬂies to attack your enemies.  DEHYDRATE  Withasqueezinggesture,youindicate your target and see sweat pour off it.  You toss the powdered dried carrot into the air as you cast this spell, and itvanishes.Youchooseyourselfasthe spell’srecipientandyoureyesbeginto glow with an alien purple luster.  Evocation [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 2-ft.-radius sphere Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  The sphere can affect a maximum of one creature or object per round, and winks out if it exceeds the spell’s range. Focus: A gray pearl worth at least 100 gp.  DEIFIC VENGEANCE  Scrolls provide spellcasters with a cheap way to have access to spells they don’t normally prepare  the subject is automatically thrown in that direction. If some obstacle prevents the subject creature from reaching its expelled height, it takes 1d6 points of damage for every 10 feet of movement it was unable to complete, so that a creature hurled 50 feet up in a room with a 20foot ceiling would take 3d6 points of damage from the impact, then take 2d6 points of damage when it falls back to the ground.  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Cleric 2, Puriﬁcation 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half Spell Resistance: Yes You call out to your deity, declaring your foe’s crimes and asking your deity to punish him. This spell deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6), or 1d6 points per caster level (maximum 10d6) if the target is undead.  DELAY DEATH  The subject of this powerful spell is unable to die from hit point damage. While under the protection of this spell, the normal limit of –9 hit points before a character dies is extended without limit. A condition or spell that destroys enough of the subject’s body so as to not allow raise dead to work, such as a disintegrate effect, still kills the creature, as does death brought about by ability score damage, level drain, or a death effect. The spell does not prevent the subject from entering the dying state by dropping to –1 hit points. It merely prevents death as a result of hit point loss. If the subject has fewer than –9 hit points when the spell’s duration expires, it dies instantly.  DELAY DISEASE  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You press your focus to the creature and implore the contagion that ravages it to lie dormant. As the spell takes effect, a dimyellowglowpassesoverthecreature’s body. The progress of any nonmagical disease that already afﬂicts the target is halted for the duration of the spell. Delay disease allows the subject to skip  DELUSIONS OF GRANDEUR  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes By shouting ﬂattering comments at your intended subject, you release the energy of the spell. The target of your spell glows momentarily with a white nimbus of crackling energy that fades to a sickly gray before disappearing completely. This powerful phantasm fools the subject into believing itself more competent and safe than it really is. The spell makes any action the subject considers attempting seem easily accomplished, requiring only a token effort. Deadly wounds seem like mere scratches, stalwart foes appear weak and intimidated, and the subject’s own attacks seem stronger and more effective. As a result of its skewed perceptions, the subject takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls, saves, ability checks, and skill checks, as well as to Wisdom. This penalty cannot reduce the subject’s Wisdom below 1. Finally, the subject becomes so completely enamored with its own (false) abilities that it cannot ﬁght defensively or take the total defense action.  DEMON DIRGE  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF  You cry out the ancient words and make the prescribed motions, and your foe lets out a howl of pain as his blood boils in his veins. Demon dirge deals 2d6 points of damage each round for the duration of the spell to any creature that has both the chaotic and evil subtypes (such as a howler or a demon). No saving throw is allowed against this damage. If the target creature also possesses the tanar’ri subtype (MM 316), the spell has a much more powerful effect. In addition to the damage, a tanar’ri is stunned for the duration of the spell unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save.  CHAPTER 1  Yougesturetowardyourallyandcallupon thepowerofyourbeliefs.Asoft,goldenglow appearsonyourcompanion’schest,around his heart.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Living creature Duration: 1d6 rounds; see text Saving Throw: None or Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  the required saving throw against the disease for the day that the spell is in effect. During this period, the subject accrues no further ability damage from the disease. A skipped saving throw counts as neither a success nor a failure for the purpose of recovery from the disease. Furthermore, the incubation period of any disease to which the subject is exposed during the spell’s duration does not begin until the spell expires. Delay disease does not cure any damage that a disease might already have dealt, and it has no effect on magical or supernatural diseases.  DEMONHIDE  Abjuration [Evil] Level: Blackguard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Evil creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your minion with your holy symbol and invoke the horrid words of the lower planes. A ﬁery glow spreads across your servant’s skin, leaving it with a deep red luster. The subject gains damage reduction 5/cold iron or good.  DESICCATING BUBBLE  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 3-ft.-radius sphere of air Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  63  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  From your outstretched hand bursts a small sphere similar in appearance to a soapbubble.Itquicklyexpandsandspeeds in the direction you indicate. A globe of supernaturally dry air rolls in whichever direction you point and engulfs those it strikes. It moves 30 feet per round and can leap up to 30 feet to strike a target. If it enters a space with a creature, it stops moving for the round and deals 2d4 points of damage as it evaporates moisture from the subject. (The subject can negate this damage with a successful Reﬂex save.) Oozes, creatures composed of water (such as water elementals), and creatures with the aquatic subtype take 2d6 points of damage. The bubble moves as long as you actively direct it (a move action for you); otherwise, it merely stays at rest. The surface of the bubble has a spongy, yielding consistency (similar to that of a soap bubble, but not fragile and allowing objects to pass through it without affecting the spell) and so does not cause damage except by absorbing moisture. It cannot batter down large obstacles. The bubble winks out if it exceeds the spell’s range. Arcane Material Component: A tiny bag or bladder ﬁlled with air, and a sprinkle of dust.  DETECT FAVORED ENEMY  Divination Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Quarter circle emanating from you to the extreme of the range Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Usingyourpassionforﬁghtingyourfoe,you reach out with your magic and your mind to sense the presence of your enemies. You can sense the presence of a favored enemy. The amount of information revealed depends on how long you study a particular area. 1st Round: Presence or absence of a favored enemy in the area.  64  2nd Round: Types of favored enemies in the area and the number of each type. 3rd Round: The location and HD of each individual present. Note: Each round you can turn to detect things in a new area. The spell can penetrate barriers, but 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt blocks detection.  DEVIL BLIGHT  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Living creature Duration: 1d6 rounds Saving Throw: None or Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You cry out the ancient words and make the prescribed motions, and your foe lets out a shriek of agony as it stumbles under the force of the spell. This spell deals 2d6 points of damage per round for the duration of the spell to creatures that have both the lawful and evil subtypes (such as a barghest or a devil). No saving throw is allowed against this damage. If the target creature also possesses the baatezu subtype (MM 306), it must succeed on a Fortitude save or be stunned for the duration of the spell.  DIAMONDSTEEL  Transmutation Level: Paladin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Suit of metal armor touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You pass your hand over the suit of armor several times before ﬁnally touching it. As you do so, you feel a warmth grow in the palm of your hand. The warmth passes into the armor and manifests as a sparkling shine.  Diamondsteel enhances the strength of one suit of metal armor. The armor provides damage reduction equal to half the AC bonus of the armor. This damage reduction can be overcome only by adamantine weapons. For example, a suit of full plate would provide damage reduction 4/adamantine, and a +1 breastplate (+6 AC) would provide damage reduction 3/adamantine. Material Component: Diamond dust worth at least 50 gp.  DIMENSION DOOR, GREATER  Conjuration [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Range: Touch Target: You and touched objects or other touched willing creatures Duration: 1 round/2 levels Your ﬂesh gives an involuntary shudder asyouwillyourselfelsewhere.Youvanish, reappearing some distance away. This spell functions like dimension door (PH 221), except as noted above and that you can transfer the targets once per round, up to a distance of 25 feet + 5 feet per two levels, as a move action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  DINOSAUR STAMPEDE  Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Throwing down and shattering a fossil to complete the spell, you call upon potent natural forces and energies, and manifest them in the form of a swath of intangible, spectral, stampeding dinosaurs. Creatures in the spell’s area take 1d12 points of damage +1 point per caster level (up to +20). Creatures more than 10 feet above the ground are not affected by dinosaur stampede. With a simple gesture (a free action), you can make the spectral forms move  along the ground up to 40 feet per round (moving its effective point of origin). Creatures cannot be damaged more than once per round by dinosaur stampede. Material Component: A fossil.  DIRE HUNGER  The subject creature adds 1-1/2 times its Strength bonus to this damage. If the creature already has a bite attack that deals more damage, use that damage value instead. The subject creature eschews all other attacks or actions except for its new bite attack, but it defends itself normally. It moves to attack the nearest living creature it can get to and attacks this creature until it is dead or until another living creature is closer. The subject creature attacks whatever living creature is nearest, regardless of former allegiance or personal connection. If moving toward the nearest living creature would move the creature into  DIRGE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: 50 ft. Area: All enemies within a 50-ft.radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Asyousing,translucentspectralskullsﬂoat down from the sky like falling snow. Your song draws the energies of death and destruction down on your enemies. Each round, any enemy in the area takes 2 points of Strength and Dexterity damage. Subjects can attempt a Fortitude save each round to negate the damage, but a successful save does not prevent damage in future rounds.  CHAPTER 1  The spell’s subject becomes maddened by terrible pangs of hunger, viewing all creatures as food sources.  1 1d2 1d3 1d4 1d6 1d8 2d6 2d8 4d6  Illus. by J. Jarvis  You feel pangs of hunger well up within your abdomen as you complete the spell. A blood-red glow of energy radiates from yourintendedtargetandthehungeryoufelt subsides.Thetargetcreature’sfaceelongates intoatoothy,dinosaurlikesnoutﬁlledwith serratedteeth,anditsbellydistendsasifthe creature were undernourished.  Fine Diminutive Tiny Small Medium Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  a dangerous area (precarious footing, a huge ﬁre, or a deadly trap is in the way) the subject creature moves around the hazard if it can or moves to attack another creature if moving around the hazard isn’t possible. If such movement brings the subject creature closer to another living creature, it attacks that creature instead. If the subject of the spell cannot detect or get to a living creature nearby, it goes looking for one to attack.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  The subject creature gains a new bite attack that does damage according to the creature’s size:  A dinosaur stampede mows down anything in its path  65  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DIRGE OF DISCORD  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Evil, Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You create an unholy, cacophonous dirge thatﬁllsthetargets’mindswiththescreams ofthedying,thewailingofthedamned,and the howling of the mad.  For the purpose of this spell, a shapechanger is any creature with the shapechanger type or a supernatural or extraordinary ability that allows it to assume an alternate form. A wizard who knows alter self is not a shapechanger (since a spell is not a supernatural or extraordinary ability), but a barghest is (since it has the supernatural ability to assume alternate forms, even though its type is outsider). Material Component: A balm of honey and lotus ﬂower costing 25 gp, smeared on your eyelids.  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: 1 corporeal undead Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  DISCERN SHAPECHANGER  One cannot just march a ghoul into the Duke’s Court. But as the fumesissuingfromthecocoonsurround the creature, the form of the ghoul is replaced with that of a stately courtier armed with a rapier. Of course, it will have to keep its mouth shut.  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  By taking a standard action to concentrate, you can see the true form of creatures within 60 feet. Each round, you can examine one creature you can see to determine whether it is polymorphed, disguised, or transmuted, and what its true form is. If you look at a shapechanger in its true form, you immediately sense its shapechanging ability, but you can’t determine what other forms it might be capable of assuming.  66  This spell causes a color pool on the Astral Plane—an irregular patch of color containing a portal to another plane—to appear to be a different color, and thus, to lead to another plane. True seeing or analyze portal reveals the true nature of the pool. Material Component: Four drops of colored ink.  DISGUISE UNDEAD  Creatures affected by this spell take a –4 penalty on attack rolls and Dexterity, a 50% reduction in their speed (to a minimum of 5 feet), and must make a Concentration check to cast any spell (DC equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). Material Component: A pinch of ashes from a destrachan.  The smell of wet animal dander assaults your nose even as the perfume of the material component fades. You feel suddenly more suspicious of beings around you, as if some of them might not be what they seem.  Thecolorpoolglowswiththerust-shadeof Hades, but a few words and a spattering of ink, and it glows with the amber of the BlessedFieldsofElysium.Thosewhopass through it will not know their error until it is too late.  Many wizards jealously guard their spellsbooks, placing magical and mundane wards upon them  DISCOLOR POOL  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One color pool Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: No  You make one undead—including its clothing, armor, weapons, and equipment—look different. You can make it seem 1 foot shorter or taller, thin, fat, or in between. You cannot change the creature’s body type. For example, a wight could look human, humanoid, or like any other generally humanshaped bipedal creature. Otherwise, the extent of the apparent change is up to you. You could add or obscure a minor feature, such as a mole or a beard, or make it look like an entirely different creature. The spell does not provide the abilities or mannerisms of the chosen form. It does not alter the perceived tactile (touch) or audible (sound) properties of the undead or its equipment. A bat-  Abjuration Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One warded object or area Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Your head throbs with energy as you recite theﬁnalfewphrasesofthespell.Amoment later, the energy releases and the area you designatedasthespell’stargetglowssilver forseveralseconds.Youhearasoundlikea mechanical object winding down. This spell functions like dispel magic (PH 223), except that it can be used only in the targeted or area version, and it affects only abjuration magic placed upon objects or areas (such as arcanelock,explosiverunes,ﬁretrap,glyph of warding, and guards and wards.) The maximum bonus on the level check is +10.  DISPELLING BREATH Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  Youexhaleacloudofpoisonousgasmixed with starlight motes that gravitate toward the spellcasters and summoned monsters within the cloud. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a super-  DISPELLING SCREEN  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Energy wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level, or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 1 ft./level Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Bytossingdownthesheetofcrystalinyour handandcompletingthemysteriouswords ofpowerneededtoreleasetheenergyofthe spell,youcreateanimmobile,shimmering screen of violet energy.  Any spell effect operating on a creature or unattended object that passes through the screen is affected as by a targeted dispel magic (PH 223) at your caster level. Attended items that pass through are not affected by the screen, which is the only way the screen differs from a normal targeted casting of dispel magic—attended items are essentially not targeted by the screen. Make a caster level check (1d20 + 1 per caster level, maximum +10) to dispel spell effects (DC 11 + caster level) or suppress an unattended object’s magical properties for 1d4 rounds (DC equal to the item’s caster level). Spell effects not operating on objects or creatures cannot pass through the screen. A disintegrate or successful dispel magic removes dispelling screen, while an antimagic ﬁeld suppresses it. Material Component: A sheet of ﬁne lead crystal.  CHAPTER 1  DISPEL WARD  natural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, your breath weapon acts as a targeted dispel magic (PH 223). For each creature or object that fails its saving throw against your breath weapon and that is the subject of one or more spells, you make a dispel check against the highest level spell currently in effect on the object or creature. A dispel check is 1d20 + 1 per caster level (maximum +15) against a DC of 11 + the spell’s caster level. If that check fails, you make dispel checks against progressively weaker spells until you dispel one spell or until you fail all your checks. A creature’s magic items are not affected, and creatures and objects that rolled successful saving throws against your breath weapon are likewise not affected. If a creature that is the effect of an ongoing spell (such as a monster summoned by monster summoning), is in the area and fails its saving throw against your breath weapon, you can also make a dispel check to end the spell that conjured the creature (returning it whence it came). For each ongoing area or effect spell centered within the area of your breath weapon, you make a dispel check to dispel the spell. Spells are dispelled prior to the effect of your breath weapon being resolved. You can choose to automatically succeed on dispel checks against any spell in the area that you have cast.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  tleaxe made to look like a dagger still functions as a battleaxe. This spell also foils magical means of detecting undead. The subject of disguise undead detects as a creature of the type simulated. Creatures get Will saves to recognize the glamer as an illusion if they interact with the subject (such as by touching the undead and having that not match what they see, in the case of this spell). Focus: A cocoon of a death’s head moth.  DISPELLING SCREEN, GREATER  Abjuration Level: Drow 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Thisspellfunctionslikedispellingscreen, except that the maximum caster level bonus on the dispel check is +20.  DISPLACER FORM  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Youdroptoyourhandsandkneesamoment before your extremities morph into the limbs of a great black panther. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a displacer beast (MM 66). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to magical beast, and your size changes to Large. You have the space and reach of a displacer beast (15 feet/5 feet [10 feet with tentacles]). You gain two tentacle attacks, which each deal 1d6 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer. You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average displacer  67  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Illus. by J. Engle  Displacer form gives a spellcaster some obvious advantages  68  beast (Str 18, Dex 15, Con 16), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your base land speed becomes 40 feet. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You also gain low-light vision. Your class and level, hit points, alignment, base attack bonus, and base saving throw bonuses all remain the same. You lose any spell-like abilities of your own form, and you lose any extraordinary special abilities from your own form. You retain any supernatural abilities of your own form. You keep all extraordinary special attacks derived from class levels (such as a barbarian’s rage or a rogue’s sneak attack), but you lose any from your normal form that are not derived from class levels. You can speak and cast spells while in displacer beast form, but you must physically touch any necessary material components. Your natural armor bonus becomes +5, regardless of any natural armor bonus from your normal form. While in displacer beast form, you gain the displacer beast’s displacement and resistance to ranged attacks abilities. Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional. Material Component: A single claw from a displacer beast.  DISQUIETUDE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [MindAffecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your spell warns of unseen dangers and untrustworthy allies. As you sing, your target eases away from her compatriots, doubt written on her face. The affected subject restricts its movement to avoid any physical contact, even with allies. Any ally that wishes to touch the subject must make a successful melee touch attack to do so. The subject must stay 15 feet away from all other creatures. If, at the beginning of its turn, the creature is within 15 feet of any creature, it must ﬁrst move away (beyond 15 feet from any creature) before taking any action. If the subject cannot safely move that distance, it instead must take the total defense action and remain in its space.  DISRUPT UNDEAD, GREATER  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A black ray ﬁres from your outstretched hand,piercingandpassingthroughnearby undead. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. This spell functions like disrupt undead (PH 223), except that this ray deals 1d8 points of damage per caster level to any undead, to a maximum of 10d8. If the damage is sufﬁcient to destroy the ﬁrst target, then you can redirect the ray to another undead target within 15 feet of the ﬁrst target. If you make a successful ranged touch attack on the second target, that target takes half of the damage rolled for the ﬁrst target.  DISSONANT CHANT  Abjuration [Sonic] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 100-foot-radius emanation Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  DISSONANT CHORD  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes You emit a terrible, piercing note. The note pulsesintheair,radiatinglikeashockwave. It slams into nearby creatures and rattles loose objects. Creatures (other than you) in the affected area take 1d8 points of sonic damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8).  DISTORT SPEECH  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature  For the duration of this spell, the subject has a 50% chance to miscast spells that have verbal components, and any time the subject speaks (including the use of magic items activated by command words), there is a 50% chance that the utterance is completely incomprehensible and therefore ineffective.  DISTRACT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Thisspellarousesazestandappreciationfor lifeinthetargets.Thetargetsaredistracted as they study the shapes of the clouds, the textureoftreebark,thepatternscarvedinto a stone wall, the temperature and scent of a breeze—anythingandeverythinggetstheir attention, if just for a moment. The targets of this spell must succeed on a Will save or lose themselves to the urge to experience nearly everything. Failure indicates the creatures take a –4 penalty on all Concentration, Listen, Search, and Spot checks, and can take only a single standard or move action each round, but not both. Creatures with more than 6 HD are unaffected.  DISTRACT ASSAILANT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  A creature affected by this spell is ﬂat-footed until the beginning of its next turn. Material Component: The dried wing of a ﬂy.  DISTRACTING RAY  Abjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You create a distracting and discordant chant. Affected creatures that attempt spellcasting or other activities that require concentration must make Concentration checks (DC equal to this spell’s DC + the level of the spell being cast). The DCs of activities that already require Concentration checks, such as casting defensively, increase by 4. Creatures within the area gain a +4 bonus on saving throws against language-dependent effects.  By pointing and making a number of loud, nonsensicalsoundsyoureleasethepowerof the spell. The target attempts to speak, but spews forth only gibberish instead.  Buzzing under your breath like a ﬂy, you swatattheskyandtosstheﬂy’swinginyour hand into the air. The target of your spell becomesdistracted,startingatshadowsand looking about for unseen assailants.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Your intricate hand motions slow and then stop even as you begin chanting the arcane wordsthatunlockthespell’spower.Asyou conclude,yourdisembodiedwordscontinue on, growing both in tempo and volume.  Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  You blast a nearby creature with a multicolored ray. The ray explodes on contact to form a dizzying array of bizarre swirling and ﬂashing lights around the targeted creature. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. This ray attempts to undo magic as it is being cast. Used in the same manner as a counterspell (as a readied action), the ray interferes with the manipulation of divine or arcane magic by dazzling the target. If the ray successfully strikes a spellcaster, and that spellcaster is in the process of casting a spell, then the target spellcaster must make a Concentration check to avoid losing the spell. The DC of the Concentration check is equal to 17 + the level of the spell the target is casting.  DIVINE AGILITY  Transmutation Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No Calling aloud on the divine power of your deity, you imbue a living creature with agility and skill in combat.  69  You grant the subject a +10 enhancement bonus to Dexterity.  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DIVINE INSIGHT  Divination Level: Cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level or until discharged (D) Clutching the focus of your spells to your chest, you let your eyes ﬂutter shut. As you complete the short prayer you feel your deity’s presence ﬁll you with conﬁdence. Once during the spell’s duration, you can choose to use its effect. This spell grants you an insight bonus equal to 5 + your caster level (maximum bonus of +15) on any single skill check. Activating the effect requires an immediate action. You must choose to use the insight bonus before you make the check you want to modify. Once used, the spell ends. You can’t have more than one divine insight effect active on you at the same time.  DIVINE INTERDICTION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. +5 ft./2 levels) Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on a creature, object, or point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates or None (object); see text Spell Resistance: Yes or No (object); see text You shout out a plea, calling upon your deity to quell the power of another deity’s follower. This spell can be cast at a point in space, but the effect is stationary unless cast on a mobile object. The spell can be cast on a creature, and the effect then radiates from the creature and moves as it moves. A creature can attempt a Will save to negate the spell, and spell  70  resistance, if any, applies if the spell is cast on a creature. Divine interdiction interferes with a cleric’s connection to her divine source of power, resulting in a temporary loss of the ability to turn or rebuke creatures and loss of granted domain powers. Paladins, blackguards, and other classes capable of rebuking and turning also suffer a temporary loss of this ability. This affects the subject’s ability to channel energy through the use of a turn or rebuke attempt, and so also interferes with the use of many divine feats.  DIVINE PROTECTION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allies in a 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You call upon your holy powers to aid your companions and a golden light appears from above, bathing them with sparkling radiance. Allies gain a +1 morale bonus to their Armor Class and on saving throws.  DIVINE SACRIFICE  Evocation Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Giving up some of your life force to win the battle, you empower your next blow against your foe. Your ﬁrst attack each round for the duration of the spell deals an extra 5d6 points of damage if it hits, and you take 10 points of damage each time you make such an attack, whether or not the attack is successful.  DOLOROUS BLOW  Transmutation Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Alongingforbattleﬁllsyouasyoucomplete this spell. Upon touching the intended weapon,thefeelingfadesevenasadullred aura encompasses the weapon. For the duration of the spell, the weapon’s threat range is doubled, and its critical threats automatically conﬁrm, so every threat is a critical hit. The latter effect does not apply to any weapon that already has a magical effect related to critical hits. Multiple effects that increase a weapon’s threat range (such as this spell and the Improved Critical feat) don’t stack. You can’t cast this spell on a natural weapon, such as a claw.  DOOMTIDE  Illusion (Pattern) Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 80 ft. Effect: Eight 10-ft. cubes extending straight from you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youﬁllanareawithillusoryblack,creeping mist that vaguely resembles thousands of slender grasping tentacles. Creatures within the area must make Will saves or be dazed for 1 round. Any creature moving into the mist, or a creature that begins its turn in the mist, must succeed on a Will save or also be dazed for 1 round. The mist ﬁlling the area obscures all sight, including darkvision, beyond 5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has concealment. Creatures farther away have total concealment. When you cast the spell, you decide if the effect remains stationary or  Denied the power to turn undead by her foe’s divine interdiction, a cleric falls before a horde of undead  if its point of origin moves straight away from you at a rate of 10 feet per round. A moderate wind disperses the effect in 4 rounds; a strong wind disperses the mist in 1 round.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  DOWNDRAFT  Evocation [Air] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (20ft. radius, 100 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Dropping the small carving in your hand to the ground, you crush it with your foot as you recite the last few words of the spell. In the distance you see a column of air turn a hazy gray. The air column then blasts toward the ground, and you hear a distant whoosh. Downdraft sends a column of turbulent air rushing toward the earth. Airborne creatures caught in the area of a downdraft must succeed on a Reﬂex save or immediately plummet up to 100 feet straight downward, taking falling damage (1d6 points of damage per 10 feet fallen) if the downdraft makes them hit the ground or collide with an object. Those who succeed on the Reﬂex save plummet only 50 feet. Creatures already on the ground must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be knocked prone by the spell. Material Component: A balsa-wood bird carving, which is crushed underfoot.  72  DRACONIC MIGHT  Transmutation Level: Paladin 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  DRAGON ALLY  Conjuration (Calling) Level: Dragon 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Effect: One called dragon of 18 HD or less This spell functions like lesser dragon ally, except you can call a single dragon of up to 18 HD. XP Cost: 250 XP.  DRAGON ALLY, GREATER  Conjuration (Calling) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Effect: One called dragon of 22 HD or less This spell functions like lesserdragonally,exceptyou can call a single dragon of up to 22 HD. XP Cost: 500 XP.  DRAGON ALLY, LESSER  Dragon ally summons a dragon to do your bidding, but only at a great price  Upon casting this spell, your ally’s face is coveredbrieﬂywithaﬁnepatternofyellow scales.Thescalesfade,butthegoldenradiance remains. The subject of the spell gains a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, Constitution, and Charisma. It also gains a +4 enhancement bonus to natural armor. Finally, it has immunity to magic sleep and paralysis effects. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  Conjuration (Calling) Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One called dragon of 15 HD or less Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youfeelsomeofyourlifeforcebeingpulled from you in the casting of the spell. A large dragon lands nearby. “You wish to discuss something?” it asks, eying your belongings. This spell calls a dragon. You can ask the dragon to perform one task in exchange for a payment from you. Tasks might range from the simple (ﬂy us across the chasm, help us ﬁght a battle) to the complex (spy on our enemies, protect us on our foray into the dungeon). You must be able to communicate with the dragon to bargain for its services.  Evocation [Good or Evil] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Using magic to mimic a dragon’s breath, you spew forth a gout of energy. You gain the ability to breathe a gout of energy as a standard action that mimics a dragon’s breath. Once you’ve used the breath attack, you must wait 1d4 rounds before doing so again. When you cast dragon breath, you choose one true dragon whose breath you’re emulating. If you choose a chromatic dragon, then the spell gains the evil descriptor. If you choose a metallic dragon, then it gains the good descriptor. Particulars for the breath weapons of each of the true dragons are provided below.  Metallic Dragons Brass: 15-ft. cone of sleep, lasts 1d6 rounds; Will negates. Bronze: 30-ft. line of electricity, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Copper: 15-ft. cone of slow, lasts 1d6 rounds; Will negates. Gold: 15-ft. cone of ﬁre, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Silver: 15-ft. cone of paralysis, lasts 1d6 rounds; Fort negates. Arcane Material Component: A dragonscale of the appropriate color.  DRAGONSIGHT  Transmutation Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D) You cast this spell and your eyes enlarge and turn yellow and catlike, like those of a dragon. You gain the visual acuity of a dragon, including low-light vision, darkvision, and blindsense. You can see four times as well as a normal human in low-light conditions and twice as well in normal light. Your darkvision is effective out to 10 feet per caster level. You take half the normal penalties for distance on Spot checks. Your blindsense has a range of 5 feet per caster level. None of these effects stack with any low-light vision, darkvision, or blindsense you might already have. Focus: A dragon’s eye.  DRAGONSKIN  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level You say nothing, but make the motions in theprescribedpatternandholdthedragon’s scale aloft. Your ﬂesh erupts with hard, colorful scales. Your skin toughens and becomes scaly like that of a chromatic dragon, of a color that you select. You gain an enhancement bonus to natural armor equal to +1 per two levels (to a maximum of +5 at 10th level), as well as energy resistance 10 against the type of energy appropriate to the color you select: acid (black or green), cold (white), electricity (blue), or ﬁre (red). Your energy resistance increases to 20 at 10th level. Material Component: A dragon’s scale. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  CHAPTER 1  DRAGON BREATH  Chromatic Dragons Black: 30-ft. line of acid, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Blue: 30-ft. line of electricity, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Green: 15-ft. cone of acid, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. Red: 15-ft. cone of ﬁre, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half. White: 15-ft. cone of cold, 1d8/2 caster levels (maximum 10d8); Reﬂex half.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The summoned dragon requires payment for its services, which takes the form of coins, gems, or other precious objects the dragon can add to its hoard. This payment must be made before the dragon agrees to perform any services. The bargaining takes at least 1 round, so any actions by the creature begin in the round after it arrives. Tasks requiring up to 1 minute per caster level require a payment of 50 gp per HD of the called dragon. For a task requiring up to 1 hour per caster level, the creature requires a payment of 250 gp per HD. Long-term tasks (those requiring up to 1 day per caster level) require a payment of 500 gp per HD. Especially hazardous tasks require a greater gift, up to twice the given amount. A dragon never accepts less than the indicated amount, even for a nonhazardous task. At the end of its task, or when the duration bargained for elapses, the creature returns to the place it was called from (after reporting back to you, if appropriate and possible). XP Cost: 100 XP. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  DREAM CASTING  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting]; see text Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Casting Time: 1 hour Target: You and one dreamer Duration: 24 hours/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates; see text You complete the spell with a few last gesturesandarcanewords.Youfeelapressure inyourmindasyoubegintorelaytheintent of your dreaming contact. This spell functions like dream (PH 225), except as noted above and that you can alter the sleeping person’s dreams to produce a speciﬁc desired effect. The dreamer gets a Will saving throw to resist the additional effects of this spell; if the save succeeds, the dream casting spell can send only a message, in the manner of the dream spell. If the saving throw fails, you decide what additional effect the message carries. Fear: Your image in the dream is surrounded by intimidating imagery and an aura of power. For the duration of  73  Illus. by B. Gagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  the spell, any time the dreamer can see you or knows you are present, he is shaken. This is a compulsion and fear effect. Charm: Your image in the dream appears particularly helpful and kind. For the duration of the spell, the dreamer is under the effect of a charm monster spell. This is a charm effect. Rage: Your image in the dream taunts and harasses the dreamer. For the duration of the spell, any time the dreamer can see you or knows you are present, he preferentially attacks you if in a combat situation. The dreamer gains a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, attack rolls, ability checks, skill checks, and weapon damage rolls when attacking you while under this effect. This is a compulsion effect. Harrow: Your image in the dream behaves in a bizarre and irrational manner. For the duration of the spell, the dreamer behaves in an unusual manner, gaining two random traits from Table 4–24: One Hundred Traits (DMG 128), rerolling any results not pertinent to behavior. If the dreamer can see you or knows you are present, he is confused for 1 round/level.  DREAM SIGHT  Divination Level: Dream 6 Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: See text Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) In sleep your spirit rises to travel about and observe the world. You fall into a deep sleep while your spirit leaves your body invisibly in incorporeal form and travels to distant locations. Your spirit can move 100 feet per round, and can see and hear anything you could if you were in the same location. The spirit can be blocked by any spell that wards incorporeal creatures, and it can be detected and attacked in the same way as incorpo-  74  Dream sight gives a sleeping character the ability to pass through the world like a ghost  real creatures can. Your spirit can do nothing but move and observe—it cannot speak, attack, cast spells, or perform any other action. At the end of the spell, your spirit instantaneously returns to your body and you wake up. If your body is disturbed or attacked while your spirit is wandering, the spell ends immediately.  DROWN  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You speak the words and make the sign of thewave.Yourfoesputters,watergushing from his mouth, then collapses. You create water in the lungs of the subject, causing it to begin drowning (DMG 304) as if it had failed to continue holding its breath. The subject’s hit points immediately drop to 0, and it falls unconscious. In the next round, it loses another hit point (bringing its  hit points to –1) and is dying. In the following round, it dies. Coughing and other attempts by the subject to physically expel the water from its lungs are useless. However, another creature can stabilize the subject by making a DC 15 Heal check on the creature before it dies. Undead, constructs, creatures that do not need to breathe, and creatures that can breathe water are unaffected by this spell.  DROWN, MASS  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 9 Targets: One or more creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart. You speak the words and make the sign of the wave, indicating each of your foes in turn.Theysputterandpitchforward,water gushing from their mouths and nostrils. This spell functions like drown, except that it affects multiple creatures.  DUELWARD  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level or until discharged (D)  Abjuration [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One 1-foot length of tunnel with a diameter of up to 10 feet Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You scribe a spiral in the air with the diamond-tipped bit of charcoal, chanting thewordsofthespell.Immediatelythesides of the cavern begin to contract, sealing the passage behind you. You cause a 1-foot length of subterranean tunnel to constrict, “locking” it against others who might wish to traverse its length. This spell affects only naturally occurring tunnels or worked tunnels that are surrounded on all sides by unworked, natural, subterranean earth. You can affect any tunnel  EARTH REAVER  An earth lock spell causes a tunnel to constrict seconds before charging minotaurs reach the gap  The constriction takes 1 round to complete. Any Large or smaller object or creature that partially blocks the constriction point is pushed, unharmed, to one side or the other. (A creature can decide which way to move; an object moves randomly.) A Large or larger object or creature that blocks the constriction point prevents the spell from working until moved. You can freely pass through tunnels that you have secured with this spell. (The constriction opens and closes on your command, taking 1 round for  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  EARTH LOCK  Illus. by R. Spears  While a duelward spell is in effect, counterspelling is an immediate action for you, allowing you to counterspell even when it is not your turn without having previously readied an action. You also gain a +4 competence bonus on Spellcraft checks made to identify spells being cast. The ﬁrst time you successfully counterspell while the spell is in effect (whether you counterspell as an immediate action or not), duelward is discharged. Material Component: A miniature silk glove.  either process). A tunnel secured with earth lock can be bypassed by others in several ways. A DC 20 Escape Artist check allows the creature making the check to squeeze through the constriction but leaves it intact. A DC 25 Strength check breaks the constriction and ends the spell. A successful dispel magic or knock spell opens the constriction—the former by ending the spell and the latter by suppressing it for 10 minutes. If a creature burrows through the earth lock, the spell ends. The constricted tunnel can also be dug out normally. Identifying a tunnel secured with earth lock (as opposed to a tunnel that just ends) requires a DC 20 Search check. Material Component: A diamond chip worth at least 50 gp, embedded in a piece of charcoal.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Theairaroundyoucrackleswithmagical energy as you ﬁnish uttering the last syllables of the spell’s formula. You immediately feel as if your link to the arcane somehow has increased, ﬁlling you with conﬁdence and a sense of security.  whose diameter does not exceed 10 feet. A square-sided or rough tunnel can also be affected, as long as its diameter at the point where the spell is cast does not exceed 10 feet.  Withastern,commandingword,youpoint at a spot on the ground. An instant later, the earth at the indicated spot erupts in a shower of rock, dirt, and ﬁre. Creatures and objects within the area take 4d6 points of damage from the impact of the rock shards, as well as 3d6 points of ﬁre damage; no saving throw applies to the damage. Creatures in the area must also succeed on a Reﬂex saving throw or be knocked prone.  75  EARTHBIND  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your foe will reach you in seconds. You cast this spell, and yellow strips of magical energyloopaboutitswings,hamperingits ﬂight and dragging it to ground. You hinder the subject creature’s ability to ﬂy (whether through natural or magical means) for the duration of the spell. If the target fails its saving throw, its ﬂy speed (if any) becomes 0 feet. An airborne creature subjected to this spell falls to the ground as if under the effect of a feather fall spell. Even if a new effect would grant the creature the ability to ﬂy, that effect is suppressed for the duration of the earthbind spell. Earthbind has no effect on other forms of movement, or even on effects that might grant airborne movement without granting a ﬂy speed (such as jumping or levitate or air walk spells).  EARTHEN GRACE  Abjuration [Earth] Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yousprinklethespell’scomponentonyour target,causingitsskintomomentarilytake on the speckled gray look of granite. The smell of dust hangs heavily in the air. You grant the subject an afﬁnity for earth and stone. Any damage the subject takes from a stone or earthen source counts as nonlethal damage for the duration of the spell. Natural attacks by creatures made of earth or stone (such as stone golems), natural attacks by creatures of the earth subtype, and attacks by stone weapons (such as a  76  stone hammer or a sling stone) instead deal nonlethal damage, as does falling damage when the subject lands on rock or earth. When the nonlethal damage the subject has taken (from any source) equals the subject’s current hit points, the spell ends, and any further damage from a stone or earthen source causes damage normally. Material Component: A chunk of granite.  EARTHEN GRASP  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Animated earthen arm Duration: 2 rounds/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You raise your arm above your hand, your ﬁngers ﬂexed like talons. Nearby, an arm made of earth but as large as a person erupts from the ground, its hand grasping at the air. You bring forth from the ground an arm made of dense, compacted earth or soil that can grapple your foes. You can cause the arm to rise only out of earth, mud, grass, or sand, and the spell fails if you attempt to cast it in an area with the wrong materials (including stone). Treat the arm as a Medium creature, with a base attack bonus equal to your caster level and a Strength of 14 +2 per three caster levels (16 at 3rd level, 18 at 6th level, and so on). The arm doesn’t move from the square it appears in, but can make one grapple attempt per round against any creature in its square or any adjacent square. Doing so does not provoke attacks of opportunity. If the arm can target multiple creatures, you choose one. If you are unable to choose a target, the arm attacks a random creature within reach (possibly including your allies). Each round when it successfully pins a target, the hand deals lethal damage equal to 1d6 points + its Str modiﬁer. The earthen arm has AC 15, hardness 4, and 3 hit points per caster level. If reduced to 0 or fewer hit points, it crumbles to dust. Material Component: A miniature hand sculpted from clay.  EARTHFAST  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: One stone structure or rock formation, up to 25 cubic ft./level Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Gray bands extend from your ﬁngertips, wrapping themselves around the wall like a brace, strengthening it for the coming assault. You reinforce a rock formation or stone structure. The earthfast spell doubles the structure’s hit points and increases its hardness to 10. This spell does not function on constructs.  EASY CLIMB  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Vertical path 10 ft. wide and 20 ft. tall/level Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) By pushing upward with your hand and speaking in a commanding voice, you cause indentations to form in the surface you designate. You create a path of handholds and footholds up the surface of a cliff face, tree trunk, wall, or other vertical obstacle. This effect changes the surface to the equivalent of a very rough wall (Climb DC 10).  EASY TRAIL  Abjuration Level: Druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 40 ft. Area: 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  Divination Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Animal skull touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  The easy climb spell can create a path of escape where none existed before  You sweep your arm as if to push aside a branch and simultaneously call out for the plants around you to move aside. Obediently, the plants surrounding you oblige. Anyone in the area of the spell (including you) ﬁnds the undergrowth held aside while they pass. This effect essentially provides a trail through any kind of undergrowth, and you treat any trackless terrain as having a trail (PH 164). Once the effect of the spell passes, the plants return to their normal shape. The DC to track anyone who traveled within the area of this spell increases by 5 (the equivalent of hiding the trail). This spell has no effect on plant crea-tures (that is, they aren’t pushed or held aside by its effect).  EBON EYES  Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You feel, more than see, a black haze form at the corner of your eyes. Upon touching your intended subject the haze disappears andthecreature’seyesbecomeshroudedin blackness. The subject of this spell gains the ability to see normally in natural and  Illus. by E. Polak  You cast the spell and the animal skull in your hand glows green, the radiance fading quickly. You cast your perception intotheskullandseeyourownformholding it. You switch your viewpoint back and set the skull aside, able to eavesdrop and surprise any trespassers.  CHAPTER 1  ECHO SKULL  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  magical darkness, although it does not otherwise improve the subject’s ability to see in natural dark or shadowy conditions. The subject ignores the miss chance due to lack of illumination other than total darkness. While the spell is in effect, a jet-black ﬁlm covers the subject’s eyes, a visual effect that gives the spell its name. Material Component: A pinch of powdered black gemstone of any type.  You can see, hear, and speak through a tiny dried animal skull at any distance. As long as you and the skull remain on the same plane, you can see and hear as if you were standing where it is, and during your turn you can switch your perception from its location to your own or back again as a free action. Focus: A tiny dried animal skull.  ECTOPLASMIC ARMOR Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No  Withaﬁnalword,shimmeringtranslucent slime appears around the target and ﬁts to its form like a suit of plate.  77  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject of the spell gains a +5 armor bonus to AC, with an additional +1 to the bonus for every four caster levels you have (maximum +9 bonus at 16th level). This armor bonus applies only against incorporeal touch attacks. All other attacks ignore the armor bonus from ectoplasmic armor.  ECTOPLASMIC FEEDBACK  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: See text Ashimmeringsheathofenergysurrounds you, promising harm to incorporeal creatures that touch you. Any creature that hits you with an incorporeal touch attack takes 1d6 points of force damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10). If the attacker has spell resistance, it applies to this effect.  EFFULGENT EPURATION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One magic-absorbing sphere per caster level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Completing the powerful spell, you bring into being ﬂoating spheres of silver, like bubbles of mercury. When you cast this spell, you bring forth one ﬂoating, silvery sphere per caster level, each about the size of your head. These spheres hover around you to provide protection from magical effects. As a standard action, you can shift the spell’s effect (and thus all the spheres) to any other creature within  78  range. You can shift the effect once per round. Each of these spheres can absorb and completely negate any spell or spell-like ability, regardless of level, that directly targets the subject. The spheres do not automatically absorb all spells; the subject can choose whether or not to let them absorb any given spell cast upon it. (This option allows the creature to beneﬁt from helpful spells.) Area spells and spells that do not actually have a target cannot be absorbed. Once a sphere has absorbed a spell or spell-like ability, it simply fades away. Only spells and spell-like abilities of deiﬁc power can overcome the protection provided by effulgent epuration.  ELECTRIC JOLT  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A white-hot electric spark dances on your ﬁngertip and then bolts toward your target. You release a small stroke of electrical energy. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The spell deals 1d3 points of electricity damage.  ELECTRIC LOOP  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, each of which is adjacent to another target Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Spitting a harsh-sounding arcane word, you snap your ﬁngers, and lightning leaps among your foes. You create one small stroke of lightning that targets one creature per three  caster levels you possess (maximum four creatures). Each target must be in a square adjacent to another target. The spell deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to each target. A creature that fails its Reﬂex save must make a successful Will save or be stunned for 1 round. Material Component: A loop of copper wire and a magnet.  ELEMENTAL BODY  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level Drawing upon the power of the elemental planes,yourtransformyourbodyinaﬂash of light. You can transform your body into a particular type of elemental substance. You and your possessions appear to be made of that element, though in the same general shape and size as your normal appearance. You gain the following abilities when you cast elemental body: • You have the beneﬁts of the attune form spell (page 17) with respect to the appropriate element. If you choose a water body, for example, you can breathe normally on waterdominant planes. • You are immune to poison, sleep, paralysis, and stunning, and are not subject to extra damage from critical hits or ﬂanking. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. • Your creature type remains unchanged, so you are unaffected by spells that target elementals, but you gain the air, earth, ﬁre, or water subtype depending on the elemental substance you chose.  In addition, you gain the following exceptional abilities according to the element chosen: Air: Fly at your normal speed (perfect maneuverability), air mastery (airborne creatures take a –1 penalty on attack rolls and damage rolls against you).  EMERALD FLAME FIST Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature or object touched Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  ENERGIZED SHIELD, LESSER  Abjuration [see text] Level: Cleric 2, paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Shield touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Upon casting the spell, you gain the senses of animal creatures. You gain low-light vision and either blindsense out to 30 feet or scent (your choice). You also gain a +2 bonus on Listen and Spot checks.  Illus. by C. Frank  While picturing a certain kind of animal in your mind, you cry out in imitation of its mostcommoncall.Immediatelythereafter, you perceive your surroundings as the animal you imagined would.  Abjuration [see text for lesser energized shield] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 This spell functions like lesser energized shield, except that the energy resistance is 10 and damage dealt is 2d6.  A silver aura surrounds the touchedshieldforamoment before it appears to transform into the chosen type of energy. The shield hums with power.  EMBRACE THE WILD Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  ENERGIZED SHIELD  CHAPTER 1  Crackling emerald ﬂames wreathe your hand as you ﬁnish the spell, lighting the area around you in a green glow.  action to attempt a DC 15 Reﬂex save, which extinguishes the ﬂames and ends the spell. You can use this spell to attack an object. Nonmagical, unattended objects are automatically engulfed in green ﬂame and take 3d6 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level each round. SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Earth: Earth mastery (you gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if both you and your foe touch the ground), push (you can start a bull rush maneuver without provoking attacks of opportunity), +3 natural armor bonus to AC. Fire: Fire immunity, burn (those you hit in melee and those who attack you with natural weapons must make a Reﬂex save or catch ﬁre, with a save DC equal to that of a ﬁre elemental of the same size). Water: Swim at your normal speed, water mastery (you gain a +1 bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if both you and your opponent touch water), drench (you can use your elemental form to put out nonmagical open ﬂames and dispel magical ﬁre you touch as if casting dispel magic at your caster level). Theelementalbody spell has the descriptor of the element you choose. So, if you choose a body of ﬁre, elemental body is a ﬁre spell. Material Component: A bit of the element in question from a plane other than the one where the spell is being cast.  Emerald ﬂame ﬁst sends a strong message to your foes  One of your hands bursts into an aura of brilliant emerald ﬂame, shedding light equal to that of a torch. With a standard action, you can make a melee touch attack that deals 3d6 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20). The creature you touch is engulfed by the ﬁercely hot aura of ﬂame. Each round at the beginning of its turn, the creature is allowed a Fortitude save to prevent further damage, but on a failed save the creature is still engulfed in the ﬂaming aura and again takes 3d6 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20). An engulfed creature that fails its Fortitude save can use a full-round  When this spell is cast, the shield touched appears to be made entirely out of one type of energy (ﬁre, cold, electricity, acid, or sonic). Whoever bears the shield gains resistance 5 against the chosen energy type. Additionally, if the wielder successfully hits someone with the shield with a shield bash attack, the victim takes 1d6 points of the appropriate energy damage in addition to the normal shield bash damage. The energy type must be chosen when the spell is cast and cannot be changed during the duration of the spell. The energy resistance overlaps (and does not stack) with resist elements. A given shield cannot be the subject of more than one lesser energized shield or energized shield spell at the same time.  79  The descriptor of this spell is the same as the energy type you choose when you cast it.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ENERGY EBB  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youpointyourﬁngeranduttertheincantation, releasing a black needle of crackling negativeenergythatsuppressesthelifeforce of any living creature it strikes.  This spell functions like enervation (PH 226), except the creature struck gains negative levels over an extended period. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If the attack succeeds, the subject initially gains one negative level, then continues to gain another negative level each round thereafter as its life force slowly bleeds away. The drain can be stopped only by a successful DC 23 Heal check or the application of a heal, restoration, or greater restoration spell. Each round after the ﬁrst, on your turn, the affected creature can attempt a Fortitude saving throw to end the effect. If you strike an undead creature, that creature gains 4d4×5 temporary hit points that last for up to 1 hour.  ENERGY IMMUNITY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6, druid 6, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Asenseofsecurityﬁllsyouasyoucomplete the spell. As you touch the intended target ofthespell,thefeelinglingersforamoment before fading.  80  This abjuration grants a creature and its equipment complete immunity to damage from one of the ﬁve energy types—acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, or sonic. Energy immunity absorbs only hit point damage, so the recipient could still suffer side effects such as drowning in acid, being deafened by a sonic attack, or becoming immobilized in ice (and thus helpless). Energy immunity overlaps protection from energy and resist energy. As long as energy immunity is in effect, the other spells absorb no damage.  ENERGY SPHERES  Evocation [Acid, Cold, Electricity, Fire, Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Five ﬂoating spheres Duration: 1 round/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes; see text You toss each of the marbles into the air, making the incantation as you do so. Each marbleturnsadifferentcolor—palegreen, white,blue,red,andviolet—andsettlesinto orbit around your head. You create a circle of ﬁve colored spheres that orbit your head at a distance of 1 foot. These spheres provide as much light as a torch and can be used offensively or defensively. Each sphere corresponds to one of the ﬁve types of energy (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, sonic). If used to attack, on your turn as a standard action you can direct one or more spheres to strike a creature or creatures in range, no two of which are more than 30 feet apart. Each sphere deals 5 points of energy damage per ﬁve caster levels (maximum 20 points of damage) to a single creature, so an 11th-level caster’s sphere deals 10 points of energy damage. The subject can make a Reﬂex save for half damage against each sphere. If you are attacked with an effect that causes energy damage, and the sphere of that type of energy is still present, you can have that sphere absorb some of that energy damage. Each sphere grants you energy resistance 5 per ﬁve caster  levels. If a sphere is used to absorb damage, that sphere is destroyed. When used to attack a creature with spell resistance, make one spell resistance roll for all spheres that attack the target in a round. Success or failure applies to all spheres striking the creature that round. Material Component: Five glass marbles.  ENERGY TRANSFORMATION FIELD  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 4 rounds Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You hold the eye in your palm, sprinkle it with blood and diamonds, and speak the words. Slowly it rises from your hand, emitting a soft beam that illuminates the chosen area. Then it disappears, and you place the spell within the magic trap. You create a lingering zone of transformative magic that absorbs magic energy from magic items or spellcasting and uses it to power another spell tied to that location. For example, you could have an energy transformation ﬁeld tied to a summon monster V spell that would summon a monster when the ﬁeld had absorbed enough magic. The ﬁeld absorbs the magic of spells cast, spell-like or supernatural abilities that are activated, and magic items used within its dimensions. Each source of magic provides spell levels of energy to the ﬁeld equal to the spell level of the effect used. Supernatural abilities that emulate spells provide energy equal to the spell level of the effect. Supernatural abilities that do not emulate spells provide energy equal to the HD of the creature using the ability. For example, a cast ﬁreball spell or a charge from a wand of ﬁreball would add three spell levels to the ﬁeld’s store, a potion of cure light wounds would add one, and a wish from a ring of three wishes would add nine. Items that don’t have a clearly deﬁned spell level (such as the effects  has an equal chance of absorbing a spell effect in that area. Material Component: Three drops of your blood, an eye from any humanoid, and 5,000 gp worth of powdered diamond. XP Cost: 250 XP.  ENERGY VORTEX  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [see text] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft. Targets: All creatures within a 20-ft.radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Energy wells up inside you and explodes outward in a furious burst. When you cast energy vortex, you choose one of four energy types: acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre. A blast of that energy type bursts in all directions from you, dealing 1d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20) to nearby creatures other than you. If you are willing to take the damage yourself, you deal twice as  This gnome druid chose to cast a cold version of energy vortex  Illus. by R. Horsley  tion of its previous casting has expired. If a linked spell requires concentration to maintain, the ﬁeld expends one spell level for every hour of concentration (the ﬁeld’s concentration is interrupted only by its complete destruction). Spells that require a target will target the living creature nearest to the ﬁeld. Typical spells linked to an energy transformation ﬁeld are blindness/deafness,ﬁreball,suggestion,summonmonster, or wall of force. Spells that have a costly material component or an XP cost cannot be linked to a ﬁeld, but those with a costly focus can if the focus object is present within the ﬁeld (typically sealed into a wall or in a secret compartment). Only Mordenkainen’s disjunction, limited wish, wish, or similar spells can destroy the energy transformation ﬁeld. Spells of lower level, such as dispel magic and greater dispel magic, are absorbed by it, and an antimagic ﬁeld prevents it from absorbing magical energy within the ﬁeld but does not otherwise hamper this spell. If two or more ﬁeld spells share an overlapping area, each ﬁeld  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  of most rods) use the prerequisite caster level needed to create that item (so an immovable rod would provide two spell levels every time it was activated because of its levitate prerequisite). Effects that are absorbed give no indication of where the magic went; they simply vanish. The ﬁeld absorbs only magic that is actually used within its area. Ongoing magical effects that enter the area, including spells cast from outside the area into the ﬁeld or continually functioning items such as a +1 mace, are often visibly reduced, but do not have their actual effects hindered. For example, a continual ﬂame would dim slightly, but its overall magic would not be affected. An energy transformation ﬁeld has a single spell linked to it. When the ﬁeld has absorbed spell levels equal to the spell level of its linked spell, it automatically casts that spell at a point within the ﬁeld designated by you at the time of the casting of the ﬁeld. This expends those absorbed spell levels (although unused levels remain until they are used or expire). The cast spell functions as if cast by you in terms of duration and all level-based spell effects. Absorbed spell levels fade at a rate of one per day if not used. The ﬁeld automatically triggers its linked spell if it has enough stored spell levels and the dura-  81  much damage. You don’t get a Reﬂex save, but spell resistance applies, as do any resistances and immunities you have to the energy type. The descriptor of this spell is the same as the energy type you choose when you cast it.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ENERVATING BREATH Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  Your breath weapon explodes from your mouth, brilliant but mixed with sharp spikes of living darkness. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you can modify your breath weapon so that it is laced with negative energy. In addition to the normal energy damage your breath weapon deals, creatures that fail their saving throws against the breath weapon gain 2d4 negative levels. If the subject gains at least as many negative levels as it has Hit Dice, it dies. Each negative level gives a creature the following penalties: –1 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, skill checks, ability checks, and effective level (for determining the power, duration, DC, and other details of spells or special abilities). Additionally, a spellcaster loses one spell or spell slot from her highest available level. Assuming the subjects survive, they regain lost levels after a number of hours equal to your caster level. Ordinarily, negative levels have a chance of permanently draining the subject’s level, but the negative levels from enervating breath don’t last long enough to do so. If an undead creature is caught within the breath weapon, it gains 2d4×5 temporary hit points before taking damage from the breath weapon. These temporary hit points last for up to 1 hour.  82  ENHANCE FAMILIAR  Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Familiar touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) After you touch the target familiar, the creature perks up and appears more alert. You infuse your familiar with vigor, granting it a +2 competence bonus on saves, attack rolls, and melee damage rolls, as well as a +2 dodge bonus to Armor Class.  ENHANCE WILD SHAPE Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  You call upon the primordial energies of nature to ﬁll you with the raw power of nature. A feral feeling grows within you, seeking release. This spell infuses your wild shape ability with magical energy, magnifying and enhancing its power. The type of enhancement must be chosen at the time the spell is cast and cannot be changed once the spell is in effect. The next time you activate your wild shape ability (during the duration of enhance wild shape), this spell enhances your new form in the way you selected. The enhancement to your wild shape remains as long as you stay in that form (or until the spell’s duration expires) but does not apply to your next wild shape form. If you do not activate your wild shape ability during the duration of enhance wild shape, the spell has no effect. You select one of the following enhancements when you cast this spell. • Assume the form of a plant with your next wild shape.  • Gain the extraordinary abilities of the new form. • The new form assumed is stronger than normal and gains a +2 bonus to Strength. • The new form assumed is more agile than normal and gains a +2 bonus to Dexterity. • The new form assumed is healthier than normal and gains a +2 bonus to Constitution. A druid can be affected by more than one enhance wild shape spell at a time, but a different wild shape enhancement must be chosen each time.  ENLARGE PERSON, GREATER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Range: Touch Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  Yourintendedsubjectbeginstogrowrapidly as you complete the spell. This spell functions like enlarge person (PH 226), except as noted above.  ENRAGE ANIMAL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One animal Duration: Concentration +1 round/ level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Youfeelinexplicablyangryasyounearthe conclusionofthespell’scasting.Thefeeling subsidesslightlyasyoureleasethespellinto your target. Enrage animal affects only creatures of the animal type and bestows a +4 morale bonus to Strength and Constitution, a +2 morale bonus on Will saves, and a –2 penalty to Armor Class. This effect is otherwise identical to a barbarian’s rage (PH 25), except that the animal is not fatigued at the end of the rage.  ENTANGLING STAFF  Youcastthespellandapurpleglowappears in your mark’s eyes. You hold out your hand and demand the object it holds in a compelling voice.  ENTICE GIFT  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, Greed 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)  Entangling staff makes a simple piece of wood into a surprisingly versatile weapon  You enchant a creature so that it feels suddenly compelled to give you what it is holding when you cast this spell. On the creature’s next action, it moves as close to you as it can get in a single round and offers you the object as a standard action. This spell allows you to act out of turn and accept the “gift” if the creature reaches you to hand you the object (assuming you have a free hand and can accept it). The subject defends itself normally and acts as it wishes on subsequent rounds, including attempting to get the object back if desired. If the subject is prevented from doing as the spell compels, the spell has no effect. For example, if the subject is paralyzed and cannot move or drop the item, nothing happens.  ENVELOPING COCOON Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, M  A cocoon of force encloses a creature of size Large or smaller, containing it for the spell’s duration or until the cocoon is destroyed. The cocoon has hardness 10 and 10 hit points per caster level. The enveloping cocoon prevents the creature trapped inside from moving or casting spells with somatic components. The cocoon is too conﬁning to permit effective attacks with anything larger than a natural or light weapon (and the creature inside can attack only the cocoon in any event). You can attach a second spell to the cocoon by casting it at the cocoon. When the enveloping cocoon spell ends or is dismissed, the attached spell automatically affects the creature inside, with no save allowed (although spell resistance, if any, still applies). If the cocoon is destroyed before it is dismissed or the spell duration ends, the attached spell is wasted. Any of the following spells from this book can be attached to an enveloping cocoon: infestation of maggots, languor, miasma, and phantasmal disorientation. In addition, a cocoon can be used in conjunction with these spells from the Player’s Handbook: baleful polymorph, blight, contagion, dominate animal, ﬂame strike, and poison (the subject fails the initial save but can attempt the second save). Material Component: A live caterpillar.  Illus. by M. Phillippi  Each time you successfully strike a foe with the staff (a normal melee attack), you deal normal damage and can attempt to start a grapple as a free action without provoking attacks of opportunity. This grapple attempt does not require a separate touch attack. You gain a +8 bonus on grapple checks you cause by striking a foe with the entangling staff. You can attempt to grapple creatures up to one size category larger than you. If your grapple check succeeds, your quarterstaff’s vines constrict your foe, dealing 2d6 points of damage (you can choose to deal nonlethal damage instead of normal damage if you wish). You then have two choices: Release: You release your opponent from the grapple. Some vines remain clinging to your foe, leaving it entangled for the duration of the spell. You can attack different enemies in later rounds with the staff, potentially grappling and constricting or entangling them. Maintain: You maintain your hold. In subsequent rounds, you deal constriction damage with a successful grapple check. You can then choose to release or maintain the hold again. Focus: A quarterstaff.  Crushingacaterpillarbetweenyourﬁngers, you create a tight cocoon of shimmering blue-green energy around your foe.  CHAPTER 1  Rapping your staff with a knuckle, you cause it to sprout wriggling vines that grab and lash at the air.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Cocoon of force around one Large or smaller creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Quarterstaff touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Yes (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Target: One creature Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  83  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  ERADICATE EARTH  Abjuration [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 40 ft. Area: 40-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes  ETHEREAL BREATH Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  You grasp the stone ﬁrmly and point your ﬁst outward. You feel the stone vanish, and a huge,silentexplosionripples through the air. A shock wave radiates from you, seismically damaging all nearby creatures that have the earth subtype. Any such creature that is within the area of the spell takes 1d8 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d8). Material Component: A small stone.  You infuse yourself with the essence of a prehistoric raptor. New sensations assault youasyounoticesounds,smells,andother elements of your surroundings that you could not perceive before. Your physical appearance does not change. Your speed increases to 60 feet (if it is already 60 feet or faster, it does not change), and you gain a +8 bonus on Hide, Jump, Listen, Spot, and Survival checks. You also gain the scent ability (MM 314).  84  ETHEREAL CHAMBER  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One ethereal creature Du ration: 1 minute/ level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes You pinch a piece of glass between your ﬁngers and as it crumbles to nothingness, a glassyprisonspringsinto being.  ESSENCE OF THE RAPTOR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  they were material, and does not affect material creatures in its area.  After the casting of ethereal breath, a dragon’s breath weapon affects incorporeal creatures  You exhale a blast of ﬁre down the corridor, but none of the furnishings take any damage. On another plane of existence, a hordeofetherealmaraudersisnownothing more than smoldering meat. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you can modify your breath weapon to manifest on the Ethereal Plane instead of on the Material Plane. (You must be on the Material Plane, or on another plane with a coexistent Ethereal Plane, for this spell to function.) Your breath weapon affects ethereal creatures as if  You create a translucent prison of pure crystalline force around a target on the Ethereal Plane. You must be able to see or otherwise target the creature you wish to affect. The subject affected by the chamber cannot move on either the Ethereal Plane or its coterminous planes for the duration of the spell but is otherwise unaffected. The subject cannot move onto another plane while inside the chamber, including the Material Plane. The subject within the crystalline prison cannot make physical attacks or be attacked and is unaffected by most spells and supernatural abilities. Gaze attacks and sonic spells function through the walls of the crystalline prison, but a creature within the chamber gains a +2 bonus on saving throws. The target of ethereal chamber can break the crystalline prison by making a Strength check (DC 10 + caster level). A disintegrate spell destroys an ethereal chamber. Material Component: A piece of translucent glass.  ETHEREAL MOUNT  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One quasi-real mount, plus one additional mount/2 levels Your spell draws ether into form, creating a misty mount for you to ride.  Necromancy [Evil, Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 feet Target: Living creatures Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast this spell and your eyes begin to tingle, brimming with dark energy. You shootaglanceatyourrival,andshefreezes in her tracks from your malignant glare. Immediately upon completion of the casting of this spell, you target a living creature within range with your glare; that creature becomes paralyzed with fear for 1d8 rounds. You must be able to see the creature, and it must be able to see you (though it need not meet your gaze).  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Ranged weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) As you complete the complicated ritual of thespellyouseeinyourmind’seyethevital areas of your favored enemy’s anatomy. All rolls made to conﬁrm critical threats by the target weapon against your favored enemies automatically succeed, so every threat is a critical hit. The affected weapon also ignores any miss chance due to concealment whenever you ﬁre at a favored enemy (unless the target has total concealment, in which case the normal miss chance applies). If the ranged weapon or the projectile ﬁred has any magical effect or property related to critical hits, this spell has no effect on it.  EXCAVATE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One 5-ft.-by-5-ft. opening, 1 ft./level deep Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You toss the bit of earth against the wall and it glitters and burns as it strikes the stone. The rock vaporizes where it hits and apassageopensbeforeyou,burrowinginto the wall. As with passwall (PH 259), this spell allows you to create a passage through  EXPEDITIOUS RETREAT, SWIFT  CHAPTER 1  EVIL GLARE  EXACTING SHOT  wooden, plaster, or stone walls, but not through metal or harder materials. If a wall’s thickness is more than 1 foot per caster level, then a single excavate spell simply makes a niche or short tunnel with the stated dimensions. Several excavate spells can be used in succession to breach very thick walls by forming a continuing passage. Unlike passwall, excavate is an instantaneous effect that does not end and cannot be dispelled; any passage it creates is permanent. Material Component: A pinch of excavated earth.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like phantom steed (PH 260), except as noted here. You call into being one or more quasi-real mounts. These mounts accept only you and those that you designate as riders. The mounts appear as horses or any other commonly ridden mounts, but they have a foggy, almost translucent nature, and their colors shift across the spectrum over time. These mounts have AC 18 (–1 size, +4 natural armor, +5 Dex), and hit points equal to 10 + your caster level. They do not ﬁght and have no attacks. If reduced to 0 hit points, an ethereal mount melts into the ethereal fog from which it came. An ethereal mount has a speed of 240 feet on the Ethereal Plane and can carry its rider’s weight plus 10 pounds per level. (If the Deep Ethereal is used in your cosmology, then the amount of time to reach destinations is halved while on an ethereal mount.)  Once per round after that for the duration of the spell, you can target another creature with your glare as a standard action. You can’t target the same creature twice with a single casting of the spell, regardless of the outcome of its saves.  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Duration: 1 round  In a breathless voice you call out, as if you were already running a race. This spell functions like expeditious retreat (PH 228), except as noted above.  EXPLOSIVE CASCADE  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: One 5-ft. square/level, all of which must be connected in one continuous path (S) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdthemetaltubeoutfromyourbody and cast the spell. A bright ball of ﬂame manifests and skips across the battleﬁeld, immolating targets in its path. You create a path of ﬂame when you cast this spell. Anything along this path takes 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to all creatures and objects it touches. The ﬂame lights up the area as if it were a torch, and small sparks and decaying ﬂames remain in the area for 1 round, shedding light as candles but dealing no damage. A creature or object can  85  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  be affected only once by each casting of this spell. If the damage from the ﬂame destroys an interposing barrier, the ﬂame can move beyond the barrier if it has area remaining. Material Component: Bat guano, sulfur, and copper packed into a metal tube with one closed end.  EXTEND TENTACLES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  Illus. by J. Jarvis  Youwriggleyourtentaclesinacomplicated choreography of movement, and your tentacles lengthen. This spell lengthens your tentacles, increasing the reach of your tentacle attacks by 5 feet. The tentacles attack as normal. If you do not already have tentacles, the spell has no effect on you.  EXTRACT WATER ELEMENTAL  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes Horriﬁc but effective, extract water elemental kills a foe by turning the water in its body into a separate creature  86  Callingupontheessenceofelementalwater, you surround your target creature with a swirling blue and red aura. The aura seeps into the creature a moment before water spurts forth from its pores. It cries out in pain. This brutal spell causes the targeted creature to dehydrate horribly as the moisture in its body is forcibly extracted through its eyes, nostrils, mouth, and pores. This deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6), or half damage on a successful Fortitude save. If the targeted creature is slain by this spell, the extracted moisture is transformed into a water elemental of a size equal to the slain creature (up to Huge). The water elemental is under your control, as if you summoned it, and disappears after 1 minute. This spell has no effect on living creatures with the ﬁre subtype.  EYE OF THE HURRICANE  Abjuration [Air] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 40 ft. Area: 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on you, with 10-ft.-radius quiet area centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Your voice trails off into whispers as you near the end of the spell’s complex ritual. The whispers begin to build upon one another, echoing in the air around you, swirling and twisting until they become a steadycacophony.Thewindgathersspeed, creating a spherical vortex around you. With this spell, you create a swirling miniature storm that provides a measure of protection, but leaves you and those near you unaffected. The storm that surrounds you has hurricane-force winds spinning in a circle with you at the center. Normal ranged attacks through the hurricane’s windy area are impossible, and even heavier projectiles such as siege weapons and giant boulders take a –8 penalty on the attack roll. Creatures who move inside the spell’s area suffer effects depending on their size and whether they’re airborne. Each creature must make a saving throw at the beginning of its turn or when it enters the affected area.  Divination (Scrying) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Unlimited Effect: Magical sensor Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Yourinvocationcreatesaminiatureﬂoating eye of faintly glowing blue energy. Spying yourenemyfromthesafetyofyourmagical sensor, you unleash your spell. This spell functions like arcane eye (PH 200), except as noted here. You can cast  EYES OF THE KING  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Hunger 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Unlimited Effect: Magical sensor Duration: Concentration + 5 rounds, up to 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Letting a bit of bat fur loose to ﬂoat on the air,yousummonhuge,glowinggreenbats to serve as your eyes. You summon four ﬁendish dire bats (MM 62) that blaze with a faint ghoulgreen light (they glow as bright as a candle). These ﬁendish dire bats have damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite good attack that provides a +4 bonus on one damage roll. The bats allow you to see through their eyes, from their perspective, using your own visual senses. If you have darkvision, low-light vision, or spells cast that enhance your visual senses, such as true seeing or see invisibility, you continue to gain the beneﬁt of those abilities or spells through the eyes of your bat minions. The bats also give you the beneﬁt of their blindsense ability for the purpose of viewing their surroundings for the duration of the spell. You can summon the bats at any point you can see, but they can then travel outside your line of sight without hindrance. Even while outside your line of sight, they follow your mental directions on where to explore. The  dire bats travel together, never separating by more than 40 feet. They ﬂy with a speed of 40 feet if viewing an area ahead as a human would (primarily looking at the ﬂoor) or at half speed (speed 20 feet) if examining the ceiling and walls as well as the ﬂoor ahead. The bats can travel in any direction as long as the spell lasts. You must concentrate to control the dire bats. If you do not concentrate, the bats move to attack the closest active creature. Once concentration lapses, the spell ends 5 rounds later. Material Component: A bit of bat fur.  FAITH HEALING  CHAPTER 1  EYE OF POWER  any spell of 3rd level or lower that has a range other than personal through the eye. Any spell so cast functions as though it had been cast from the eye’s location rather than yours. Casting any spell of higher than 3rd level through the eye not only produces no effect (though the spell is still expended), but it destroys the eye of power and ends the spell. Unlike an arcane eye, an eye of power is visible and corporeal, so it can be destroyed. The eye is a Fine object with AC 18 and 77 hit points. It uses your save bonuses for saving throws. Material Component: A bit of bat fur.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Medium or smaller creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked 1d4×10 feet away from the eye of the hurricane’s center and take 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet traveled in this manner. Creatures blown away are knocked prone as well. Flying creatures are blown back 2d6×10 feet and take 2d6 points of nonlethal damage. Large creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked prone by the force of the wind. Flying creatures are instead blown back 1d6×10 feet. Huge creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be checked. Flying creatures are instead blown back 1d6×5 feet. Gargantuan and Colossal creatures can move through the spell’s area without adverse consequences. Even creatures that succeed on their saving throws must attempt them again whenever they start a turn inside the spell’s area or whenever they move back into it. The spell’s area is effectively a sphere. Although the area is centered on you, you’re not within the wind. If you move, the eye of the hurricane moves as well to keep you in the center. If you cast eye of the hurricane so that creatures are inside the eye when the spell begins, they must make Fortitude saves when your movement brings the area of wind upon them. Thereafter, if you move the spell area into a square occupied by another creature, that creature makes a Fortitude save at the beginning of its next turn (assuming the windy area of the spell is still on it).  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youplaceyourhandsonyourloyalacolyte and blue-silver radiance discharges from yourhands.Thehorrendouswoundsacross his chest heal, leaving no scar. When laying your hand upon a living creature, you channel positive energy that cures 8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (up to +5). The spell works only on a creature that worships the same deity as you. A target with no deity or a different deity from yours is unaffected by the spell, even if the target would normally be harmed by positive energy.  FALSE GRAVITY  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You clatter the magnets in your hand and set your foot on the wall. Your second step carriesyouontothewall,andyoucanwalk up it with ease.  87  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject of this spell can travel on any solid surface as though that surface possessed its own gravity. For example, the subject could walk or even run up a wall as though the wall were a perfectly level ﬂoor. The subject can switch “down” as often as it likes during the spell’s duration, though only once per round, as a free action. Unattended objects fall, as normal. The subject of false gravity can ﬂy by choosing a solid surface and letting itself fall through the air toward it. A character “ﬂying” in this fashion moves at 30 feet per round and can make one turn, in any direction, once per round, by redeﬁning its personal gravity. A creature falling in this fashion loses all “downward” momentum when it changes its gravity. Material Component: A pair of magnets.  Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One container or garment with a pocket touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  When you cast this spell, a garment or container becomes a safe haven for a Tiny or smaller familiar. The spell turns the target pocket into a comfortable extradimensional space (about 1 cubic foot). The familiar can ﬁt inside the space without creating any noticeable bulge in the item. Whenever the familiar is touching you, you can whisk it inside the space as a free action by speaking a command word chosen by you when the spell is cast. If the familiar can speak, it can command itself inside. As a free action, you can  expires or if the spell ends abnormally (as above), the familiar appears in your space unharmed. Material Component: A tiny golden needle and a strip of ﬁne cloth given a half twist and fastened at the ends.  FANGS OF THE VAMPIRE KING  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Assassin 3, blackguard 3, Deathbound 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  Hissing an evil laugh, you sprout sharp fangs to drain the blood of your foes. You grow vampirelike fangs that allow you to make bite attacks as a natural attack. Your bite attack deals 1d6 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer, and 1 point of Constitution damage. If you make a full attack with other weapons, you can make a bite attack as a natural secondary attack (–5 penalty on the attack roll).  FAMILIAR POCKET  You move your hand along the mouth of the pocket intended for your familiar, and a line of glowing white energy follows in its wake. The glow fades, and the space seemsstrangelylargerinsidethananormal pocket.  88  call the familiar forth or it can leave the space on its own. Once inside, the familiar has total cover and total concealment, and as a free action, you or the familiar can further seal the space to make it airtight and  FANTASTIC MACHINE Fangs of the vampire king turns a spellcaster into a bloodsucking horror  waterproof. The air supply inside the sealed space lasts for 1 hour, but with the pocket unsealed, the familiar can remain inside indeﬁnitely. The familiar cannot attack or cast spells from within the space, but can use supernatural or spell-like abilities as normal (provided they don’t require line of sight, which the pocket blocks). You continue to gain the special ability granted by your familiar. While inside the pocket, the familiar continues to beneﬁt from the share spells ability as if it were adjacent to you. The spell ends if the familiar pocket is placed within or taken into another extradimensional space (such as a portable hole). If your familiar is within the pocket when the spell duration  Conjuration [Creation] Level: Craft 6, Gnome 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A 10-ft. machine Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Your spell generates an illusory, manyarmed,noisy,massivemechanicalconstruct of impressive appearance. This spell creates a bizarre, but useful, machine that you can command to perform any simple, physical task that can be described in twenty-ﬁve words or less. You can order the machine to perform the same task over and over, but you can’t change the task. You must specify the task when you cast the spell. The machine always acts on your turn  Conjuration [Creation] Level: Craft 9  This spell functions like fantastic machine, but you can concentrate on controlling the machine’s every action or specify a simple program, such as to collect all the logs in an area and stack them in a neat pile, plow a ﬁeld, drive piles, or the like. The machine can perform only fairly simple physical tasks. Directing the machine’s actions or changing its programmed movement is a standard action for you. The machine always acts on your turn in the initiative order. (It can act during the turn you cast the spell.) Except where noted below, the machine functions as a Large animated object (MM 13) constructed from adamantine. It trundles over the ground at  FAVOR OF THE MARTYR Necromancy Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One willing creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Calling upon the saints of your order, you imbue the person in need with the power to resist the dire forces arrayed against you. The subject gains immunity to nonlethal damage, charm and compulsion effects, and attacks that function speciﬁcally by causing pain, such as the wrack spell (see page 243). It is further immune to effects that would cause it to be dazed, exhausted, fatigued, nauseated, sickened, staggered, or stunned. The subject remains conscious at –1 to –9 hit points and can take a single action each round while in that state, and does not lose hit points for acting. If any of the above conditions were in effect on  the subject at the time of casting, they are suspended for the spell’s duration. (Thus, an unconscious subject becomes conscious and functional.) When the spell ends, any effects suspended by the spell that have not expired in the interim (such as the fatigued condition, which normally requires 8 hours of rest to recover from) return. Effects that expired during the duration of this spell do not resume when it ends. In addition to these effects, the subject gains the beneﬁt of the Endurance feat for the duration of the spell.  FAVORABLE SACRIFICE  CHAPTER 1  FANTASTIC MACHINE, GREATER  a speed of 60 feet. It can swim or ﬂy at a speed of 20 feet (poor). It has 16 HD, 88 hit points, AC 20 (–1 size, +11 natural), and hardness 20. Its saving throw modiﬁers are Fortitude +5, Reﬂex +5, and Will +0. The machine has a Strength of 22. A light load for the machine is up to 346 pounds, a medium load is 347–692 pounds, and a heavy load is 693–1,040 pounds. The machine can ﬂy or swim only when lightly loaded. The machine can lift a weight of up to 2,080 pounds to a height of 15 feet. It can push or drag 5,200 pounds. It can excavate 20,000 pounds of loose rock each minute (which is sufﬁcient to clear a 5-by-5-by-5-foot space in 1 round). It can excavate sand or loose soil at twice that rate. The machine makes slam attacks with an attack bonus of +17/+12 for 1d8+9 points of damage. It deals triple slam damage (3d8+27) against stone or metal. The machine can hurl Small rocks (if any are at hand) with an attack bonus of +12/+7. Its range increment is 150 feet, and it can throw a rock up to 10 range increments. A thrown rock deals 2d6+9 points of damage.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  in the initiative order. (It can act during the turn you cast the spell.) The machine functions as a Large animated object (MM 13). It trundles over the ground at a speed of 40 feet. It can swim or ﬂy at a speed of 10 feet (clumsy). It has 22 hit points, AC 14 (–1 size, +5 natural), and hardness 10. Its saving throw modiﬁers are Fortitude +1, Reﬂex +1, Will –4. The machine has a Strength of 16. A light load for the machine is up to 172 pounds; a medium load is 173–346 pounds; and a heavy load is 347–520 pounds. The machine can ﬂy or swim only when lightly loaded. The machine can lift a weight of up to 1,040 pounds to a height of 15 feet. It can push or drag 2,600 pounds. It can excavate 7,000 pounds of loose rock each minute (which is sufﬁcient to clear a 5-by-5-by-5-foot space in 3 rounds). It can excavate sand or loose soil at twice that rate. The machine has an attack bonus of +5 and can make one slam attack each round that deals 1d8+4 points of damage. It deals triple slam damage (3d8+12) against stone or metal. The machine can hurl Small rocks (if any are at hand) with an attack bonus of +3. Its range increment is 150 feet, and it can throw a rock up to 10 range increments. A thrown rock deals 2d6+4 points of damage.  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The gems vaporize in your hand as you intone the spell. The rising vapors surround your ally, granting him the blessing of your beliefs. The subject receives the protection of a divine power commensurate with the value of the expended material component. Only one of the beneﬁts described below applies per casting of this spell; they do not stack. By expending 250 gp, you grant the subject damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic 10; and spell resistance equal to your caster level. By expending 1,000 gp, you grant the subject damage reduction 10/magic; resistance to acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic 15; and spell resistance equal to your caster level +5. By expending 10,000 gp, you grant the subject damage reduction 20/magic; resistance to acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic 20; and spell resistance equal to your caster level +10. Material Component: Gems worth a total of 250 gp, 1,000 gp, or 10,000 gp.  89  FEARSOME GRAPPLE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Twoshort,otyughliketentaclessproutfrom under your arms to hang limply at your sides. When you think of grappling, the tentacles twitch to life and wave about as if seeking a foe. You grow two tentacles that grant you a +4 circumstance bonus on grapple checks. These tentacles cannot attack, hold objects, manipulate items, or perform any action other than grappling. If your caster level is at least 9th, you grow four tentacles instead, and the circumstance bonus increases to +8.  FELL THE GREATEST FOE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 2, cleric 3, paladin 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch the creature, and its muscles ripple with yellow energy. The subject gains the ability to deal greater damage against larger creatures. For every size category of an opponent bigger than the subject of the spell, the subject deals an extra 1d6 points of damage on any successful melee attack. For example, a Medium creature would deal an extra 1d6 points of damage against a Large creature, 2d6 against Huge, 3d6 against Gargantuan, or 4d6 against a Colossal creature. Material Component: A dragon’s claw or a giant’s ﬁngernail.  FIELD OF GHOULS Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Hunger 7  90  Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Wrenchinglifefromtheirbodieswithyour magic, your foes’ remains stir and rise as ghouls under your control. Humanoid creatures in the area with –1 to –9 hit points that fail their saving throws die and immediately rise as ghouls (MM 118) under your control. You choose whether the ghouls follow you, or whether they can remain where formed and attack any creature (or just a speciﬁc kind of creature) the ghouls notice. The ghouls remain until they are destroyed. The ghouls that you create remain under your control indeﬁnitely. No matter how many ghouls you generate with this spell, however, you can control only 4 HD worth of undead creatures per caster level (this includes undead from all sources under your control). If you exceed this number, all the newly created creatures fall under your control, and any excess undead from previous castings become uncontrolled (you choose which creatures are released). If you are a cleric, any undead you might command by virtue of your power to command or rebuke undead do not count toward the limit. Creatures that fall to –1 hit points or fewer in the area after the spell is cast are likewise subject to its effect and rise as ghouls on your next turn. No creature can be affected by this spell more than once per round, regardless of the number of times that the area of the spell passes over it. This spell does not affect creatures that are already dead, or creatures that are killed by reducing their hit points to –10.  FIELD OF ICY RAZORS  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 60 ft. apart  Duration: Instantaneous plus 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial Spell Resistance: Yes Yourbreathbecomescoldandfrostyasyou intone this spell, and blue-white crystals eruptfromthesoil,chillairswirlingaround their needle-sharp tips. Razor-sharp ice crystals surround the targets. Each target takes 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6); half of this damage is cold damage, and half is slashing. In addition, each target’s speed is reduced by 20 feet for 1 round per caster level. Creatures that succeed on Reﬂex saving throws take half damage and their movement is unaffected. Focus: A silver shuriken worth 50 gp that looks like a snowﬂake.  FIENDFORM  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level The bone in your hand cracks and then crumbles to dust as you complete the spell. You see within your subconscious a bestiaryofterribleﬁendsevenasdarkwhispers in your mind attempt to convince you which form to take. This spell functions like alter self (PH 197), except that you can take the form of any ﬁendish creature, demon, or devil that can be summoned by a summon monster I, II, III, or IV spell (MM 287), regardless of size. You can assume only one form with each use of the spell, but you gain all that form’s extraordinary, spell-like, and supernatural abilities, and your type changes to outsider. Spells and effects that harm or ward evil outsiders affect you, and any effect that would normally banish an outsider to its home plane instead ends the spell and leaves you dazed for 1 round per caster level. Material Component: A bone from any ﬁendish creature, half-ﬁend, demon, or devil.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  FIERCE PRIDE OF THE BEASTLANDS  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Good] Level: Cleric 8, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Green-white fog rises from the ground as you intone this spell, and great feline shadowstakesshapewithinthemistycloud.The ﬁrst of a pride of golden-pelted lions with silver eyes emerges from the fog. When the spell is complete, 2d4 celestial lions (MM 274) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 celestial dire lions (MM 63) appear. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell.  A celestial lion called by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite evil attack that provides a +5 bonus on one damage roll. A celestial dire lion called by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10; spell resistance 13; and a smite evil attack that provides a +8 bonus on one damage roll. The creatures obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the creatures. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  FIND THE GAP  Divination Level: Assassin 3, paladin 3, ranger 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  You speak the words of this spell, and a blue mark that only you can see appears on youropponent,highlightingaweakspotin her defense.  Illus. by B. Hagan  A ﬁeld of icy razors stops a centaur’s charge  You gain the ability to perceive weak points in your opponent’s armor. Your ﬁrst melee or ranged attack each round is resolved as a touch attack, disregarding the subject’s armor, shield, and natural armor bonuses (including any enhancement bonuses) to Armor Class. Other AC bonuses, such as dodge bonuses, deﬂection bonuses, and luck bonuses, still apply.  FIND TEMPLE  Divination Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 miles + 1 mile/level Area: Circle centered on you, with a radius of 10 miles + 1 mile/level Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  91  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  At ease and ﬁlled with a reassuring calm, you close your eyes for a moment to allow your deity to guide you to a holy place. With this spell, you can easily ﬁnd a place to worship and possible aid or shelter from the priests within. When the spell is cast, you sense the direction of the nearest temple to your god. If there is none within the spell’s area, the spell instead shows you the direction of the nearest temple dedicated to a god of the same alignment as yours. You can also specify a particular temple to search for, but you must have visited the temple personally at some point in the past (seeing the temple through a divination does not count).  Illus. by P. Martin  FINS TO FEET  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) The naga’s lower extremities thrash about and slowly transform into humanoid limbs. This spell transforms tails, tentacles, or ﬁnned extremities into humanoid legs and feet. Creatures so affected lose any natural swim speed they possess, but gain a land speed instead. Transmuted Medium creatures have a base land speed of 30 feet, Small and smaller creatures have a base land speed of 20 feet, and Large or larger creatures have a base land speed of 40 feet. The subject loses any natural attacks based on its tail or tentacles.  two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Withafewfrenziedmotionsyoucomplete the spell, bathing your allies in halos of magical ﬂame. This spell functions like ﬁre shield (PH 230), except as noted above.  FIRE SHURIKEN  Evocation [Fire] Level: Assassin 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: One magic shuriken/3 levels Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes With dark intent you complete the quick motions of the spell and ﬁnd in your hand several shuriken composed of ﬂame. This spell creates shuriken formed of magical ﬁre that you can throw as a normal ranged attack. You are automatically considered proﬁcient with the ﬁre shuriken, which have a range increment of 10 feet, threaten a critical hit on a roll of 19–20, and deal 3d6 points of ﬁre damage each on a successful hit (although you and your possessions take no damage as the shuriken are thrown). Any additional damage  dealt by the ﬁre shuriken (including your Strength bonus and sneak attack damage) is also ﬁre damage. The shuriken disappear when they hit, so they cannot set ﬁre to combustibles or damage objects. You can create one ﬁre shuriken per three caster levels, up to a maximum of six at 18th level. Material Component: A shuriken coated with pine sap and sulfur.  FIRE SPIDERS  Conjuration (Summoning) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Fiery spiders that cover a 10-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Tiny lights appear in the darkness—one, ten, over a hundred. As they appear, the soundofinsectilechitteringincreases,until aswarmingarmyofﬂaming,otherworldly arachnids is gathered together at your command. You call forth a teeming mass of ﬁre elementals the size of common spiders. A creature that starts its turn in the affected area takes 4d6 points of ﬁre damage. Each round, you can use a move action to direct the spiders to move up to 30 feet. If the spiders are left undirected, they move at a speed of 15 feet toward the nearest living  FIRE SHIELD, MASS  92  Evocation [Fire or Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One or more allied creatures, no Fire spiders are nearly impossible to defeat by attacking individual ones  creature, if one isn’t already in the affected area. As ﬁre elementals, the ﬁre spiders have immunity to ﬁre and are thwarted by barriers that block neutral outsiders. Any cold spell of 3rd level or higher can disperse the ﬁre spiders, ending the spell. Material Component: A pinch of sulfur.  You draw arcane power into your body, wrapping your feet and legs with wisps of ﬂame. You gain the ability to step into ﬁres and move from one ﬁre to another. The ﬁres you enter and move between must be at least as big around as you are. Fire elementals and other ﬁre creatures are not considered “ﬁres” for the purpose of this spell, nor are sources of great heat, such as pools of lava. Once in a ﬁre, you instantly know the locations of all suitable ﬁres within long range (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) and can transport yourself to one of them. Each transport counts as a full-round action. With each casting of the spell, you can transport yourself once per caster level. If a ﬁre’s location doesn’t offer enough space for you (for example, a ﬁre contained inside a furnace too small to hold you or a ﬁre already occupied by a big cauldron), it is not a viable destination and you don’t sense its location. If a ﬁre rests on a surface that can’t support you, it is still a viable destination and you suffer the appropriate consequences if you transport yourself to it. For example, if you transport yourself into a ﬁre burning in a pit full of oil, you fall into the oil when you arrive there. Fire stride provides no protection against ﬁre, so it is advisable to obtain such protection before using the spell.  In a ﬂash of light and a roar of ﬁre, your arms become wings of ﬂame. This spell transforms your arms into wings of brilliant ﬁre. The ﬂame does not damage you or any items you carry. Because your arms are transformed, you cannot hold items in your hands or cast spells that require somatic components, but rings, bracers, and other items worn on your arms when you cast the spell still function normally. The wings allow you to ﬂy at a speed of 60 feet (or 40 feet if you wear medium or heavy armor), with good maneuverability. You can charge but not run while ﬂying, and you cannot carry more than a light load aloft. Using a ﬁre wings spell requires only as much concentration as walking, so you can take other actions normally. If the spell duration expires while you are aloft, you descend at a rate of 60 feet per round for 1d6 rounds, then fall the rest of the distance if you haven’t already landed. Because dispelling a spell effectively ends it, the subject also descends in this way if the ﬁre wings spell is dispelled, but not if it is negated by an antimagic ﬁeld. If you are not ﬂying, you can make up to two attacks each round with the ﬁre wings as if they were natural weapons. A successful attack deals 2d6 points of ﬁre damage. The wings can be extinguished (and the spell canceled) by a quench spell, immersion in water, or a wind of hurricane or greater force. Material Component: The feather of a bird, which you must burn when you cast the spell. Focus: A golden amulet shaped like a phoenix (worth 150 gp).  FIREBRAND  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M  The ﬂask of alchemist’s ﬁre vanishes from your hand and the ground erupts beneath your foes, shooting multiple fountains of ﬁery liquid upward. Each burst deals 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to all creatures within the area. All subjects hit by the burst in the round the spell is cast or within the area in the following round take 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). A character struck in the round the spell is cast can attempt to extinguish the ﬂames on itself as a full-round action with a successful DC 15 Reﬂex save. Burst effects that overlap do not deal additional damage (a creature can be affected by only one burst). Material Component: A ﬂask of alchemist’s ﬁre (worth 20 gp).  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level or until expended; see text  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: One 5-ft.-radius burst/level (S) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  FIRE STRIDE  FIRE WINGS  FIREBURST  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Effect: Burst of ﬁre extending 10 ft. from you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes With a grand circular gesture the air around you ﬁlls with ﬂame. An instant later the ﬁre explodes outward, engulﬁng everything close to you. Fireburst causes a powerful explosion of ﬂame to burst from you, damaging anyone within 10 feet of you. All creatures and objects within that area, except for you and any creatures or objects that share your space, take 1d8 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 5d8). Material Component: A bit of sulfur.  93  FIREBURST, GREATER  Illus. by C. Frank  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Effect: Burst of ﬁre extending 15 ft. from you This spell functions like ﬁreburst, except that it affects creatures within 15 feet of you and deals 1d10 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 15d10).  Youstompontheground,andﬁresnuffsout all around you, rippling away to nothingness faster than you can blink. This spell functions like quench (PH 267), except as noted above. In addition, it has the following effects.  FIRES OF PURITY  Evocation [Fire] Level: Druid 6, Puriﬁcation 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless); see text You touch the target, and it bursts into ﬂames that do not harm it, although the heat you feel from the ﬁre seems quite real to you. The creature you touch bursts into magical ﬂames that do not harm the subject, but are capable of harming anyone else who comes into contact with the creature. With a successful melee attack, the subject deals an extra 1 point of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum +15). If the defender has spell resistance, it applies to this effect. Creatures that make successful melee attacks against the subject are susceptible to the same damage unless they attack with weapons that have reach, such as longspears. The subject of ﬁres of purity takes only half damage from ﬁre-based attacks. If such an attack allows a Reﬂex save for half damage, the subject takes no damage on a successful save.  FIREWARD  94  Area: One 20-ft. cube/level (S) Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)  A sorcerer keeps a ﬂame dagger at the ready while she casts another spell  While ﬁreward remains in effect, no magical ﬁre effect can function inside its area. This effect is similar to that of an antimagic ﬁeld, but only magical ﬁre is suppressed. Any nonmagical ﬁre created inside or brought into the spell’s area is immediately extinguished as well.  FIST OF STONE  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute  The complicated gestures of the spell end with a punch of your ﬁst, which now has the texture and look of stone. You transform one of your hands into a mighty ﬁst of living stone, gaining a +6 enhancement bonus to Strength for the purposes of attack rolls, grapple checks, or breaking and crushing items. In addition, you gain the ability to make one natural slam attack, dealing 1d6 points of damage + your new Strength bonus (or 1-1/2 times your Strength bonus if you make no other attacks in that round). You can make the slam attack as a natural secondary attack with the normal –5 penalty, or a –2 penalty if you have the Multiattack feat (MM 304), as part of a full attack action. However, you cannot gain more than one slam attack per round with this spell due to a high base attack bonus (+6 or higher). Your ﬁst undergoes no change in size or form, remaining as ﬂexible and responsive as it would normally be while under the spell’s effect. Material Component: A pebble inscribed with a stylized ﬁst design.  FLAME DAGGER  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A daggerlike beam Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You evoke the spell and a blazing beam of red-hot ﬁre springs forth from your hand, ready to be used as a weapon. You create a bladelike beam that you can wield as if it were a dagger. Attacks with a ﬂame dagger are melee touch attacks, and the blade deals 1d4 points of ﬁre damage +1 point per caster level (to a maximum of +10). Because the blade is immaterial, your Strength  modiﬁer does not apply to the damage. A ﬂame dagger can ignite combustible materials such as parchment, straw, dry sticks, cloth, and so on. This spell does not function underwater. Material Component: A candle.  FLAME OF FAITH  You can temporarily turn any single normal or masterwork melee weapon into a magic, ﬂaming one. For the duration of the spell, the weapon acts as a +1 ﬂaming burst weapon. Material Component: A lump of phosphorus, touched to the target weapon.  FLAME WHIPS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Effect: Flaming whips Duration: 1 round/level (D) At the conclusion of this spell, your arms stretchintowhiplikeappendagesandburst into ﬂames. Your forelimbs transform into ﬂaming whips. You gain two melee touch attacks with a 15-foot reach that each deal 6d6 points of ﬁre damage. Attacks with these ﬂaming whips replace any natural attacks you had with those limbs. While this spell is in effect, you cannot cast spells with material components, nor can you carry items with your forelimbs. Any items worn on your forelimbs cease functioning while the spell is active.  Ablindingﬂashoflightfollowsthecasting of this spell. Flashburst creates a blinding, dazzling ﬂash of light. Sighted creatures within the area are blinded for 2d8 rounds. A successful Will save negates the blindness. Creatures in the area are dazzled for 1 round even if their save was successful. Creatures outside the area, but within 120 feet of the burst, can be blinded for 2d8 rounds if they have line of sight to the burst (Will negates). Creatures outside the burst area are not dazzled. Arcane Material Component: A pinch of sulfur or phosphorus.  FLENSING  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One corporeal creature Duration: 4 rounds Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a cruel utterance, you complete the spell and unleash its terrible energy. A sickeninglywetrippingsoundaccompanies the sight of strips of ﬂesh being torn away, as if some invisible hand was attempting to peel your target like an onion. When you cast this spell, you literally strip the ﬂesh from a corporeal creature’s body, inﬂicting incredible pain and psychological trauma. Each round, the subject takes 2d6 points of damage, 1d6 points of Charisma damage, and 1d6 points of Constitution damage. A successful Fortitude save negates the ability damage and reduces the hit point damage by half for that round, but does not end the spell.  FLESHSHIVER  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Breaking the bone in the grip of your ﬁst, youhearthesickeningbutsatisfyingcrunch of your foe’s bones breaking beneath his squeezing ﬂesh.  CHAPTER 1  Using your faith as a guide for your magic, you touch the weapon and it bursts into ﬂame.  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Flensing has no effect on creatures in gaseous form. Material Component: An onion.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Nonmagical weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  FLASHBURST  A creature with Hit Dice less than or equal to your caster level is automatically stunned for 1 round (no saving throw). A creature with Hit Dice greater than your caster level is allowed a saving throw to negate the stunning effect. In the following round, the target must make a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) and be nauseated by the pain for 1d4+2 rounds. Material Component: A bone, which is snapped during the casting of the spell.  FLIGHT OF THE DRAGON  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) The wing-claw vaporizes in a puff of acrid smoke, and you feel the muscles of your shoulderswarmfromtheeldritchenergies coursing within. Great draconian wings unfurl from your shoulders and reach toward the sky. A powerful pair of wings sprout from your shoulders, granting you a ﬂy speed of 100 feet (average). You can’t carry aloft more than a light load.  95  Illus. by R. Horsley  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  When ﬂying long distances, you can ﬂy at 15 miles per hour (or 24 miles per hour at a hustle). Material Component: A dragon’s wing claw. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  FLOATING DISK, GREATER  You squawk twice like an eagleandsuddenlylongfor the freedom of the skies.  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: 3-ft.-diameter disk of force Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  This spell functions like ﬂy (PH 232), except as noted above.  FOCUSING CHANT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute (D)  Letting the mercury drip to the groundyoucreateaslightlyconcave disk of energy. It hovers several feet above the ground. This spell functions like Tenser’s ﬂoating disk (PH 294), except that the created disk does not need to stay within 3 feet of the surface beneath it. However, the disk must remain within 15 feet of you at all times. You can concentrate (as a standard action) on the disk to make it move with a ﬂy speed of 20 feet (perfect). This allows you to sit on the disk and command it to carry you about. Material Component: A drop of mercury.  FLY, MASS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  96  FLY, SWIFT  Asyourgesturespointoutwhichcreatures receivethebeneﬁtsofyourspell,theyseem lighter on their feet.  You chant softly under your breath and concentrate on the sound of your voice. Distractions fade from your consciousness,allowingyoutofocuson the task at hand. You gain a +1 circumstance bonus on attack rolls, skill checks, and ability checks for the duration of the spell. Mass ﬂy allows a whole squad of drow to gain control of the battleﬁeld  This spell functions like ﬂy (PH 232), except as noted here. This spell confers the power of ﬂight upon all targeted creatures. Each recipient of the spell must remain within 30 feet of at least one other recipient, or the spell ends for the creature that is separated from the others. If only two individuals are affected, the spell ends for both if the distance between them exceeds 30 feet.  FOEBANE  Evocation Level: Ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) Holding aloft the weapon, you name the kind of creature you wish to slay. With a ﬂash, the weapon takes on a blue glow that  quickly fades to a barely perceptible aura surrounding it.  Material Component: A 2-inch-square glass cube.  FORCE CLAW  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Invisible claw of force Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  A force chest spell gives a lich a sense of security when confronted by troublesome adventurers  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One ladder of force up to 60 ft. long Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by R. Spears  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Box of force 2 ft. on a side Duration: 24 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  This spell brings into being a lidded box of force. The box appears in your hands, and you can choose to make it either invisible or merely translucent. The chest has no weight worth noting. Solid walls of force form the chest’s ﬁve sides and lid. You and other creatures cannot open the lid except by ﬁrst speaking the password (determined by you at the time of casting). Both objects and Tiny and smaller creatures can ﬁt in the box; it holds enough air to supply  Force claw creates a Medium claw of invisible force at any spot you designate within the spell’s range. The claw guards the area of a 20-foot cube that you specify. You can move the claw’s location up to 60 feet to another point within range each round on your turn as a move action. The claw is able to make attacks of opportunity against any enemy that provokes such attacks within the guarded area. It has a +10 bonus on the attack roll and deals 1d8+6 points of damage with a successful hit. It can make an unlimited number of attacks of opportunity each round, though it can make only one such attack per opportunity. Material Component: A small, dried claw from an animal.  FORCE LADDER  FORCE CHEST  Holding your hands as if to grip a box, you feel the pressure ofoneappearasyoucompletethespell.The passwordyouchoosetounlocktheboxechoes through your mind.  Curling your hand into a claw, you ﬁnish the ﬁnal gesture. Your foes see no result from your spell, but you know they’re in for a surprise.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  When you cast this spell, choose one of your favored enemies. Against creatures of the selected enemy kind, the weapon acts as a +5 magic weapon and deals an extra 2d6 points of damage. Furthermore, while you wield the weapon, you gain a +4 resistance bonus on saving throws against effects created by creatures of that kind. The spell is automatically canceled 1 round after the weapon leaves your hand for any reason. You cannot have more than one foebane weapon active at a time. If this spell is cast on a magic weapon, the powers of the spell supersede any that the weapon normally has, rendering the normal enhancement bonus and powers of the weapon inoperative for the duration of the spell. This spell is not cumulative with any other spell that might modify the weapon in any way. This spell does not work on artifacts.  one Tiny, two Diminutive, or four Fine creatures for 1 hour. Like a wall of force spell, a force chest is immune to damage of all kinds and resists dispel magic, but it is susceptible to disintegrate and Mordenkainen’s disjunction, and it can be destroyed by a sphere of annihilation or a rod of cancellation. The box is a spell effect, and Open Lock and Use Magic Device cannot open it.  You concentrate on the small silver model of the ladder in your outstretched hand. A transparent ladder, visible only by its edges, appears. You create an immobile transparent ladder made of force. The ladder is 2 feet wide and anywhere from 10 to 60 feet long, with rungs spaced 1 foot apart. The ladder functions as a normal ladder and can support any weight. It can be destroyed by anything that destroys a wall of force. Focus: A miniature silver ladder (50 gp).  97  Illus. by S. Belledin  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  FORCE MISSILES  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Up to four creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Sparking bolts of blue magic, like giant magic missiles, streak from your outstretched hand to strike your foes and explode in sparkling bursts. You create powerful missiles of magical force, each of which darts from your ﬁngertips and unerringly strikes its target, dealing 2d6 points of damage. The missile then explodes in a burst of force that deals half this amount of damage to any creatures adjacent to the primary target. The missile strikes unerringly, even if the target is in melee or has anything less than total cover or concealment. A caster cannot single out speciﬁc parts of a creature. The spell can target and damage unattended objects. You gain one missile for every four caster levels. You can make more than one missile strike a single target, if desired. However, you must designate targets before rolling for spell resistance or damage.  Waiving your arm about your head to trace the curve of a dome, you call up a hemisphere of force as clear as glass. You create an unmoving, transparent sphere of force centered on you. The sphere negates force effects and provides an impassable barrier against incorporeal creatures. Spells with the force descriptor do not affect anything within the sphere, and any force spell that overlaps the area, such as wall of force, is automatically countered. Incorporeal creatures, or creatures with the force descriptor must make a Will save to enter the area of the sphere. Forceward does not push a creature out of the way if you move toward an incorporeal creature or force effect, and such creatures are treated as if they automatically succeeded on their saving throws against this spell.  FORCEWAVE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 10 ft. Effect: 10-ft. burst of force centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  FORCEWARD  Abjuration [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: 15 ft. Effect: 15-ft.-radius sphere centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  98  You catch the drop of water on the string and snap it at your target. The waterdrop swells and becomes a blue-green wave of magical force, tumbling toward your opponents. This spell initiates a bull rush against all creatures within 10 feet. The forcewave has a +10 bonus on the bull rush attempt. All creatures are pushed to the extent of the bull rush result, and the result of the bull rush can push creatures beyond the spell’s normal range. Focus: A small piece of string and a drop of water.  FORESTFOLD  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Warmth ﬁlls your feet, and as you glance down, you see that your feet have changed shape slightly, enabling you to better traverse a particular type of terrain. You also notice a shift in the color of your skin and clothingtomatchthecolorsmostcommonly found in your environment. You change your coloring and attune your footfalls to one speciﬁc kind of terrain (aquatic, desert, plains, forest, hills, mountains, marsh, or underground). While you are in terrain of that kind, you gain a +10 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks. You retain these bonuses even if you leave the designated terrain and return within the duration of the spell.  FORTIFY FAMILIAR  Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Familiar touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  A druid uses the freeze spell to encase a despoiler of nature in ice  You touch your familiar, and you see that the creature seems more robust.  This spell makes your familiar tougher, granting it 2d8 temporary hit points and a +2 enhancement bonus to its natural armor. It also has a 25% chance to avoid extra damage from sneak attacks or critical hits (although such attacks still deal normal damage if successful). Temporary hit points gained in this fashion last for up to 1 hour.  Agoldenauraspreadsoutfromyourﬁngertips,suffusingyourallywithagoldenglow that brightens, then fades into her skin. You surround the subject with an aura that immediately heals the creature if it is subjected to an effect that would kill it (reduce its hit points to –10 or below). When this event occurs, the fortunate fate spell intervenes by immediately triggering a heal spell upon the target. If the effect is one that causes harm in a way that a heal spell can repair (disease, hit point damage, ability damage, or poison), the target does not actually die, saved by the heal. If the effect is one that heal cannot countermand (such as ability drain, old age, negative levels, disintegration, ability drain, or death effects), the fortunate fate spell cannot prevent the creature’s death.  As long as they do not move and remain standing on solid ground, the subject creatures gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class and a +4 bonus on Strength checks made to resist being bull rushed or tripped. If this spell is cast in mountainous terrain, the bonus on Strength checks granted by this spell increases to +6.  FREEZE  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/2 levels Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  FREEZING FOG  FOUNDATION OF STONE  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Calling upon the strength of the earth, you lend some of the stability of stone to your allies.  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A target struck takes 2d6 points of cold damage. A creature struck must succeed on a Reﬂex save or be encased in a 5-inch-thick sheath of ice and be immobilized (and thus helpless). A creature encased in ice takes 2d6 points of cold damage each round until freed. A target encased in ice is aware and breathes normally but cannot speak or move other than to attempt to escape by making a Strength check (see below). It can still execute purely mental actions, such as using a spell-like ability. A spellcaster can cast a spell with no verbal or somatic component as long as the spell lacks a focus or material component, or the material component, focus, or divine focus is already in the spellcaster’s hand. The ice blocks line of effect. A winged creature cannot ﬂap its wings and falls. A swimmer can’t swim but, because ice ﬂoats, the encased swimmer will rise to the surface and bob about. A DC 22 Strength check breaks the ice, freeing the encased creature. Creatures other than the target can also attack the ice. The ice has hardness 0 and 15 hit points. When the duration of the spell expires, the ice melts and the encased creature is freed. Damage that would harm the creature must ﬁrst deal enough damage to destroy the ice before the creature takes damage, and damage dealt to the ice is subtracted from damage that would be dealt to the creature.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  FORTUNATE FATE  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Callingupondivinepower,yourhandturns cold and numb as you complete the spell. A moment later, a thin blue ray swirled with white streaks from your outstretched hand, leaving a light fog in the air where it passed.  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Fog spreads in a 20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  99  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Acoolmistrisesfromtheareayouindicate. The thick mist blocks your ability to see within it, but the ground at its edge has turned white with frost. A bank of freezing mist billows out from the point you designate, obscuring all sight (including darkvision) beyond 5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has concealment, while creatures farther away have total concealment. Each round on your turn, the frigid mist deals 1d6 points of cold damage to each creature and object within it. The fog is so thick that any creature attempting to move through it progresses at a maximum speed of 5 feet (regardless of its normal speed) and takes a –2 penalty on melee attack rolls and damage rolls and a –6 penalty on ranged weapon attack rolls (but not ranged spell attack rolls). A creature or object that falls into the fog from above is slowed, so that each 10 feet of mist it passes through effectively reduces overall falling damage by 1d6. Freezing fog also coats all solid surfaces in its area with a slick, icy rime, and on your turn each round, each creature in the area of the fog must make a successful Reﬂex save or fall prone. A creature that manages to stand must make a DC 10 Balance check in order to move, falling prone if it fails its save by 5 or more. Creatures in the fog can’t take a 5-foot step. A severe wind disperses the cloud in 1 round. The spell does not function underwater.  FROST BREATH  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 2, druid 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Givingaforcefulexhaleacrossyourcupped hand, your breath shoots forth tinged with frost and crystals of ice.  100  You breathe a cone of intense cold at your foes. The spell deals 1d4 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d4). In addition, all creatures  damaged by the frost breath that fail their Reﬂex save are dazed for 1 round by the sudden shock of cold. Material Component: Three drops of water or fragments of ice (which are held in a cupped palm and blown toward the target).  FUGUE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius spread Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Upon completing the spell, a discordant cacophony of haunting and alien music risesupintheareayoudesignate.Although thestrangemusicreachesyourears,youfeel no effect from it. Creatures that fail their save become affected by the haunting fugue in semirandom ways. On each affected creature’s turn (as long as it remains in the affected area), you make a Perform check. The check result determines how the victim’s mind and body are affected by the spell. You can select any of the effects for which your Perform check equals or exceeds the required DC. DC Result 15 Victim takes 3d6 points of nonlethal damage 20 Victim takes 3d6 points of sonic damage 25 Victim is knocked prone 30 Victim is nauseated for 1 round 35 Victim is stunned for 1 round 40 Victim attacks nearest target  All creatures that succeed on their saves against the spell are disoriented and take a –2 penalty on attack rolls and skill checks as long as they remain in the affected area. Focus: A miniature violin bow made of platinum worth 250 gp.  FUSE ARMS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature with at least two arms or tentacles touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Convulsing, the touched subject’s limbs begintooozetogetherwithasickeningnoise like a pot of melted wax splattering on the ﬂoor. With a lurch they form into one pair of massive limbs. You cause a creature’s multiple arms or tentacles to fuse together into a single pair of stronger limbs. Only limbs that the creature can use as arms or grasping limbs are affected by the spell (so basilisks and monstrous centipedes, neither of which use their limbs to attack or manipulate objects, are unaffected). For every set of limbs fused into the primary set of limbs, the creature gains +4 to Strength when using those fused limbs (affecting activities that would use those limbs, but not activities relying on its bite, legs, and so on). For example, a girallon under the effect of this spell would have one pair of arms and Strength 26 for the purpose of using those arms. A behir, which has three pairs of limbs that it can use as arms, would end up with one pair of arm-limbs with a +8 bonus to Strength for those arms (its six legs would be unaffected). The loss of limbs might reduce the number of attacks available to the subject. If the subject has only two arms or tentacles, they are fused into a single limb, and the creature gains a +4 bonus to Strength on attack rolls made with that limb.  G’ELSEWHERE CHANT Conjuration [Sonic, Teleportation] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One creature or object touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  solid object, or more than 5 feet above the ground. If your target is being held (whether an object held by a character or a character being grappled by a creature), the holding or grappling creature also receives a Will saving throw to resist.  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Force] Level: Gnome 2, Trade 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: Gem touched Du ration: 10 minutes/ level or until used Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  GEMBOMB  You place a small spark of energy in the heart of a valuable gem. Illus. by E. Polak  You turn a gem into a bomb that you (and only you) can lob at enemies. You must hold the gem in your hand when casting the spell. You can toss the bomb with perfect accuracy anywhere within 60 feet. The gembomb explodes in a 5-footradius burst dealing 1d8 points of force damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8). Tossing a gembomb is a standard action. Material Component: A gem worth at least 1 gp.  GEMJUMP  A marilith makes good use of the fuse arms spell  You touch the target and it vanishes in a showerofgoldensparks.Almostinstantly, it appears a short distance away. You teleport a target to a random, safe location up to 100 feet distant and visible to you.  To randomly determine the subject’s destination, roll 1d8 to determine the direction, then roll 1d10×10 to determine the distance from the subject’s previous location. Roll direction and distance again if this new destination is outside your line of sight, within a  Conjuration [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 round Range: Unlimited; see text Target: You and willing creatures totaling up to one/3 levels; see text Duration: Until triggered Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No; see text You mutter over the iridescent, faceted gem. It twinkles in response, and you feel a strong link between you and the stone. When you speak the word, the two of you will be reunited.  101  Illus. by R. Horsley  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  102  The general of undeath spell makes an evil cleric into a true leader of those beyond fear and death  This spell teleports you to the location of a specially prepared gem. You initially cast gemjump upon the focus, which you must touch. As a standard action any time after you prepare the stone, you can utter a command word and instantly teleport to the location of the gem, provided you and the stone are on the same plane. The teleport is always on target (as though you are using a greater teleport spell). If the area containing the gem is too small for you, you appear in the nearest sufﬁciently large space. You can transport, in addition to yourself, one Medium or smaller creature per three caster levels, and can bring along objects as long as their weight does not exceed your maximum load. An unwilling creature can’t be teleported by gemjump. Likewise, a creature’s Will save (or spell resistance) prevents items in its possession from being teleported. Unattended, nonmagical objects receive no saving throw. Focus: A gem worth 500 gp.  GENERAL OF UNDEATH Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 24 hours  Youfocusonthedarknesswithinyoursoul, willing it to grow and grant you the power to control a greater number of undead minions. This spell increases the number of Hit Dice of undead that you can control by an amount equal to your caster level. When the duration expires, you lose control of the extra undead as if you had voluntarily relinquished control of them.  GHOST TOUCH ARMOR Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch  Target: Armor of creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Confrontedwithincorporealenemies,you give the armor you touch the power to defend against such foes. The subject’s armor gains the ghost touch special ability (DMG 219). Material Component: A tiny shield made of resin.  GHOST TOUCH WEAPON  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One weapon or ﬁfty projectiles (all of which must be in contact with each other at the time of casting) Duration: 1 minute/level  Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) With a few words and a gesture, you empower a weapon to strike true against incorporeal foes.  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 5 ft./level Area: 5 ft./level-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Energy ripples outward from you, rendering solid the insubstantial. You are surrounded by a ﬁeld of energy that negates incorporeality. The radius of the ﬁeld is 5 feet per caster level. All incorporeal creatures in this ﬁeld become corporeal. Creatures cannot turn ethereal while in this area, and ethereal creatures cannot enter or affect the plane this spell was cast on while in this ﬁeld.  GHOSTFORM  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action  You assume a visible, incorporeal form like that of a manifesting ghost. You gain the incorporeal subtype for the duration of the spell, providing you with the following abilities and characteristics. You have no physical body while in this state. You can be harmed only by other incorporeal creatures, magic weapons or creatures that strike as magic weapons, and spells, spell-like abilities, or supernatural abilities. You are immune to all nonmagical attack forms. Even when hit by spells, including touch spells, or magic weapons, you have a 50% chance to ignore any damage from a corporeal source (except for positive energy, negative energy, force effects, or attacks made with ghost touch weapons). Nondamaging spell effects affect you normally unless they require corporeal targets to function (such as implosion) or they create a corporeal effect that incorporeal creatures would normally be unaffected by (such as a web or wall of stone spell). Your attacks while in ghostform pass through (ignore) natural armor, armor, and shields, although deﬂection bonuses and force effects (such as mage armor) work normally against you. Nonmagical attacks you make with a melee weapon have no effect on corporeal targets, and any melee attack you make with a magic weapon against a corporeal target has a 50% miss chance, except for attacks you make with a ghost touch weapon, which are made normally (no miss chance). Spells you cast while in ghostform affect corporeal targets normally, including spells that require you to make an attack roll (such as rays or melee touch spells). Any equipment you are wearing or carrying is also incorporeal as long as it remains in your possession. An object that you relinquish loses its incorporeal quality (and you lose the ability to manipulate the object). If you use a thrown weapon or a ranged  CHAPTER 1  GHOST TRAP  Laughing at death, you assume a ghostly form in which you can pass through walls.  weapon, the projectile becomes corporeal as soon as it is ﬁred and can affect a corporeal target normally (no miss chance). Magic items you possess work normally with respect to their effects on you or on another target. As an incorporeal creature, you have no natural armor bonus but have a deﬂection bonus equal to your Charisma bonus (always at least +1, even if your Charisma score does not normally provide a bonus). You can enter or pass through solid objects while in ghostform, but you must remain adjacent to the object’s exterior, and so you cannot pass entirely through an object whose space is larger than your own. You can sense the presence of creatures or objects within a square adjacent to your current location, but enemies have total concealment from you while you are inside an object. In order to see farther from the object you are in and attack normally, you must emerge. While inside an object, you have total cover, but when you attack a creature outside the object you have cover only, so a creature outside with a readied action could strike at you as you attack. You cannot pass through a force effect. You can pass through and operate in water as easily as you do in air. You cannot fall or take falling damage. You cannot make trip or grapple attacks, nor can you be tripped or grappled. In fact, you cannot take any physical action that would move or manipulate an opponent or its equipment, nor are you subject to such actions. You have no weight while in ghostform and do not set off traps that are triggered by weight. You move silently and cannot be heard with Listen checks if you don’t wish to be while in ghostform. You have no Strength score while incorporeal, so your Dexterity modiﬁer applies to both your melee attacks and ranged attacks. Nonvisual senses, such as scent and blindsight, are either ineffective or only partly effective with regard to you. You have an innate sense of direction and can move at full speed even when you cannot see.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Ghost touch weapon makes a weapon magically capable of dealing damage normally to incorporeal creatures, regardless of its enhancement bonus. (An incorporeal creature’s 50% chance to avoid damage does not apply to attacks made with weapons under the effect of this spell.) A ranged weapon affected by this spell does not bestow the ability on its ammunition. The weapon can be picked up and moved by an incorporeal creature at any time. A manifesting ghost can wield the weapon against corporeal foes. Essentially, a weapon under the effect of this spell counts as either corporeal or incorporeal at any given time, whichever is more beneﬁcial to the wielder.  Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  103  Illus. by C. Dien  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Already shaken by the appearance of the ghostly bard, the azers ﬂee upon hearing the spirit’s haunting tune  GHOSTHARP  Divination Level: Bard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Object touched Duration: 5 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You place the coin on the table, touch it, and whisper the words of the spell. Softly the coin begins to replay the music of the previous night’s performance.  104  You prepare an object that records and replays a song previously played or sung in its vicinity. When cast, the spell searches a radius of 50 feet for the lingering notes of a tune played there within the last day. It records these notes and reverberations. At your verbal command, “Play,” the ghostharp replays the music. The tune repeats until you command it to stop, or until its duration comes to an end. The ghostharp does not record conversations. Its imperfect replay can’t reproduce bardic music or  other magical effects, nor can it cast spells.  GHOUL GAUNTLET  Necromancy [Death, Evil] Level: Hunger 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One living humanoid creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your touch gradually transforms a living victim into a ravening, ﬂesh-eating ghoul.  The subject takes 3d6 points of damage per round while its body slowly dies and its ﬂesh is transformed into the cold, undying ﬂesh of the undead. When the victim reaches 0 hit points, it becomes a ghoul (MM 118). If the target fails its initial saving throw, remove disease, dispel magic, heal, limited wish, miracle, Mordenkainen’s disjunction,removecurse,wish,orgreater  restoration negates the gradual change. Healing spells can temporarily prolong the process by increasing the victim’s hit points, but the transformation continues unabated. The ghoul that you create remains under your control indeﬁnitely. No matter how many ghouls you generate with this spell, however, you can control only 4 HD worth of undead creatures per caster level (this includes undead from all sources under your control). If you exceed this number, all the newly created creatures fall under your control, and any excess undead from previous castings become uncontrolled (you choose which creatures are released). If you are a cleric, any undead you might command by virtue of your power to command or rebuke undead do not count toward the limit.  GHOUL GESTURE  Necromancy Level: Hunger 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray  Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Agreenraystabsfromyourpointingﬁnger to strike the belly of your enemy.  Necromancy Level: Hunger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Magical, heatless ﬂame Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Necromancy Level: Hunger 2, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Object touched Duration: Permanent until discharged Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by W. England  The effect looks like a regular ﬂame, equivalent in brightness to a torch, except for its green hue, but it creates no heat and doesn’t use oxygen. Ghoul light can be covered and hidden, but not smothered or quenched. All undead within 30 feet of a source of ghoul light gain +1 turn resistance. Multiple ghoul light sources do not stack. Darkness spells of 2nd level or higher can counter ghoul light. Material Component: A bit of rendered fat.  CHAPTER 1  A sickly green ﬂame springs forth from an object that you touch.  GHOUL GLYPH  GIANT’S WRATH  The faint, green glow of the glyph ﬂares to life. A sickly green light ﬁlls the room, illuminating the paralyzed forms of its victims, and bringing with it the stench of death. You inscribe a glyph, approximately 1 foot across, that paralyzes any living creature of Large or smaller size that comes within 5 feet of the glyph. You can scribe the glyph to be visible as faintly glowing lines, or invisible. You can inscribe a ghoul glyph on a portable object, but if the object is moved more than 5 feet, the glyph fades. Conditions for triggering a ghoul glyph are stringent. It takes effect on any creature except yourself that moves within 5 feet. It affects invisible creatures normally but is not triggered by those that travel past it ethereally. Only a single ghoul glyph can be inscribed in a 5-foot square. Ghoul glyphs cannot be affected or bypassed by such means as physical or  GHOUL LIGHT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A subject that is successfully targeted must make a Fortitude save or be paralyzed for the duration of the spell. A subject of the ray that succeeds on its Fortitude save is instead sickened for the duration of the spell. Neutralize poison removes the sickened condition. Material Component: A small scrap of cloth taken from clothing worn by a ghoul, or a pinch of earth from a ghoul’s lair.  magical probing, though they can be dispelled. Mislead and nondetection can fool a ghoul glyph. Read magic allows identiﬁcation of a ghoul glyph with a successful DC 13 Spellcraft check, if the glyph is noticed before it is activated. A rogue can use the Search skill to ﬁnd a ghoul glyph and Disable Device to thwart it. The DC in each case is 27.  Girallon’s blessing gives Krusk a hand in dealing with foes  When a glyph is activated, the target is paralyzed for 1d6+2 rounds. Additionally, if the target fails a Fortitude save, the paralyzed subject exudes a carrion stench that causes distress in all creatures within a 10-foot radius. Those in the radius, including the target, must make a Fortitude save or take a –2 penalty on attack rolls, weapon damage rolls, saving throws, skill checks, and ability checks until the paralysis effect wears off. Material Component: You trace the glyph with earth from a ghoul’s lair.  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Targets: One pebble/ 3 levels Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: None Withyourbestgiant’sshoutyourattlesome pebbles in your closed hand, completing the spell that will allow them to become boulders. You infuse a handful of stone pebbles with powerful transmutation magic. For the duration of the spell, you can hurl one pebble as an attack action that provokes attacks of opportunity. The instant the pebble leaves contact with your hand, its size and the force of your throw increase dramatically, as  105  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  the pebble transforms into a boulder. The boulder has a range increment of 120 feet, and you must succeed on a ranged attack to strike a target with the boulder. If you hit the target, the boulder deals 2d6 points of bludgeoning damage + your Str modiﬁer. You gain an insight bonus equal to your caster level on attack rolls and damage rolls (maximum +10) with these boulders. If you drop a pebble or give it to another creature, the pebbles’ magic dissipates harmlessly. Material Component: The pebbles to be transmuted.  GIRALLON’S BLESSING Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Thetouchedsubjectappearstobeindiscomfort for an instant before arms erupt from its torso with a damp squelch. You give the subject an additional pair of arms. Each of its arms—new and old—ends in a clawed hand with ﬁngers and an opposable thumb. The creature’s original arms (if any) are its primary arms, and new limbs are secondary limbs (if the subject had no arms, the arms created by the spell are its primary arms). The creature gains four claw attacks, each using its base attack bonus + its Str modiﬁer for attack rolls. Each claw deals 1d4 points of damage + the subject’s Str modiﬁer, and if an opponent is struck by two or more claws in 1 round, the subject can rend it for an additional 2d4 points of damage + 1-1/2 times its Str modiﬁer. A creature cannot use normal weapons and the claw attacks in the same round, and the subject does not gain additional claw attacks from a high base attack bonus. Material Component: A few strands of girallon hair.  106  GLASS STRIKE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature or 4 cubic ft. of material Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes The spell erupts from the surface of the mirroryouhold,strikingyourfoesquarein the chest and transforming it to glass. You transform the target into glass. You can cast either of these two versions: Glass Creature: As ﬂesh to stone (PH 232), but the subject becomes glass. Glass Object: An object of up to 4 cubic feet in volume is affected. Part of a larger object (such as a ﬂoor or wall) can be transformed by this spell. Glass has hardness 1, and 1 hit point per inch of thickness. Neither version of the spell affects magic items (magic items carried by a transformed creature remain intact). When the duration ends, the subject returns to its original materials. If the subject was broken or damaged while in glass form, its normal form has similar damage. Focus: A piece of glass from a mirror.  GLOWING ORB  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Magical, controllable light source Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No CallingonthelimitlesslightofthePositive Energy Plane, you coax a tiny portion of its power into a fragile glass sphere. This spell places a magical light source inside a glass sphere roughly the size of a human ﬁst. You can control the light level generated by a glowing orb by mental command (a standard action), provided that the orb is within 30 feet of you. The light level ranges from  no light at all to illumination within a 60-foot radius. There is no limit to the number of glowing orbs you can possess, and you can control their light levels independently or in concert. If a glowing orb is smashed, the magic is lost. If you die, however, an orb retains its magic. Any character with an Intelligence or Wisdom of at least 13 can gain control of an orb simply by touching it. Focus: A glass sphere (50 gp) into which the light is placed. An orb usable for this purpose has hardness 0 and 2 hit points.  GOLDEN BARDING  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Special mount touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Withaﬂash,aglowing,goldensuitofbarding for your special mount appears. You create a suit of barding for your mount to wear. The armor appears on your mount, ﬁtting perfectly. The golden barding you create has no armor check penalty and has no effect on your mount’s speed. The exact nature of the barding depends on your caster level. 2nd–3rd: Scale mail barding (+4 armor bonus). 4th–5th: Chainmail barding (+5). 6th–7th: Splint mail barding (+6). 8th–9th: Half-plate barding (+7). 10th+: Full plate barding (+8). You can cast magic vestment or other spells that target a suit of armor on the golden barding.  GOLEM STRIKE  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round A dim glow ﬁlls your eyes, allowing you to see—brieﬂy—weak points in the magic infused within a nearby construct.  hovering about them and forming wedges of positive energy.  Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  For 1 round, you can deliver sneak attacks against undead as if they were not immune to extra damage from sneak attacks. To attack an undead creature in this manner, you must  Youcreateacloudofsicklygrayenergythat streakstowardalivingcreature,wrapping it in the foul essence of unlife.  Transmutation [Good] Level: Bard 2, cleric 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  You create a silvery glow around your body that provides illumination to a radius of 60 feet. You gain a –20 circumstance penalty on Hide checks made while under the effect of this spell. For the duration of the spell, you gain a +2 sacred bonus to Dexterity, and your base land speed increases by 10 feet. Your touch attacks and any melee weapons you wield become infused with this power as well. They are treated as good-aligned weapons for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  GRAVE STRIKE  Divination [Good] Level: Cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Golden motes of light dance before your eyes.Theyconvergeonundeadyoulookat,  Illus. by M. Phillippi  With a single word, you call upon the might and grace of your deity, bathing your body withdivineenergy.Yourbody glows with silvery light and you feel quick and light on your feet.  CHAPTER 1  GRACE  A skull-shaped cloud of gray energy strikes your target. The gray radiance is transferred to the creature, covering it entirely. For the duration of the spell, a living subject cannot regain hit points or ability score points by any means (undead creatures can still gain hit points), nor can the creature remove negative levels. Regeneration or fast healing abilities the subject has from any source are suppressed for the duration of the spell. Spells that heal damage do not work on that individual. The subject can improve its current hit points by boosting its Constitution score and can receive temporary hit points (from an aid spell, for example). When the spell ends, automatic healing abilities, such as a troll’s regeneration, and items that restore hit points, such as a ring of regeneration, begin to function again. Material Component: A skull.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  For 1 round, you can deliver sneak attacks against constructs as if they were not immune to extra damage from sneak attacks. To attack a construct in this manner, you must still meet the other requirements for making a sneak attack. This spell applies only to sneak attack damage. It gives you no ability to affect constructs with critical hits, nor does it confer any special ability to overcome the damage reduction or other defenses of constructs.  GREAT THUNDERCLAP  A rogue and a cleric of Olidammara, this halﬂing delivers a fatal blow to a vampire with the grave strike spell  still meet the other requirements for making a sneak attack. This spell applies only to sneak attack damage. It gives you no ability to affect undead with critical hits, nor does it confer any special ability to overcome the damage reduction or other defenses of undead creatures.  GRAYMANTLE  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No Yougripthebellinyourﬁstandraiseitover your head, intoning the spell and calling down a thunderous blast in the midst of those who oppose you. You create a loud noise equivalent to a peal of thunder. The spell has three effects. First, all creatures in the area must make Will saves to avoid being stunned for 1 round. Second, the creatures must make Fortitude saves or be deafened for 1 minute. Third, they must make Reﬂex saves or fall prone.  107  Creatures that cannot hear are not stunned, but might still fall prone. Focus: An iron bell.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  GREATER (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with greater is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a greater spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  Targets: Creatures in a 5-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Acrossthemurkyplain,abeamofradiance shoots down, highlighting your foes.  Illus. by D. Martin  GUIDED SHOT  Divination Level: Ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round With a guttural utterance madewithunmovinglips,you magicallyfocusyourattention on a distant foe. Upon aiming your weapon, you note how clearlydeﬁnedyourintended target is. While this spell is in effect, your ranged attacks do not take a penalty due to distance. In addition, your ranged attacks ignore the AC bonus granted to targets by anything less than total cover, and also ignore the miss chance granted to targets by anything less than total concealment. This spell does not provide any ability to exceed the maximum range of the weapon with which you are attacking, nor does it confer any ability to attack targets protected by total cover.  GUIDING LIGHT  Evocation [Light] Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level)  108  A hail of stone spell pummels its target  Bright lights shine at the targets. The lights grant a +2 circumstance bonus on ranged attack rolls against any highlighted target. If a creature gains total cover or total concealment relative to you, or if it leaves the area, the spell ends for that target.  from your stomach. The tentacle has no eyes, but it ends in a set of snapping reptilian jaws. The tentacle created by the gutsnake spell is equivalent to a giant constrictor snake (MM 280) except that it is completely obedient to you and moves as you command. The snake has hit points equal to your own full normal total. Attacks against the snake cause you no discomfort and do not disrupt your spellcasting. If it is “killed,” the tentacle disappears without causing harm to you. The tentacle does not interfere with spellcasting in any way. Once each round as a free action, you can have the tentacle attack a creature up to 10 feet away with its bite attack, and if it successfully hits, the tentacle can use the snake’s improved grab ability to deal damage through constriction. In each round when the gutsnake is constricting a target, you cannot move more than 5 feet away from that target, unless the gutsnake makes a successful grapple check to carry the opponent with you when you move (see PH 155 for grappling rules). This is the only way in which the tentacle restricts movement. While the snake is present, you can use its Balance and Climb skill modiﬁers instead of your own, and you gain a climb speed of 20 feet. Focus: A fang from any reptile.  HAIL OF STONE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (5-ft. radius, 40 ft. high) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You concentrate on the tooth, speak the words, and a 15-foot-long tentacle sprouts  You hold the jade chip before you and blow on it as you end the spell. The chip ﬂares  GUTSNAKE  with a green ﬂame and vanishes as rocks begin to fall on your pursuers. You create a rain of stones that deals 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 5d4) to creatures and objects within the area. Material Component: A piece of jade worth at least 5 gp.  The crystal globes in your hand vibrate intensely before turning ice-cold. As you hurl them, they resemble balls of ice, an observation borne true when they strike and shatter into a shower of ice crystals. You create frigid hailstones that strike your enemies. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit with a globe. Each hailstone deals 5d6 points of cold damage. For every ﬁve caster levels, you gain an additional hailstone (maximum of four stones at 20th level), and all globes must be aimed at enemies that are all within 30 feet of each other. Material Component: A handful of crystal globes.  HAMATULA BARBS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You invoke the dark nature of the spell and slender,sharp-edgedbarbssproutfromyour body and clothing, glowing with hellish energy. Any creature hitting the subject of this spell with a handheld weapon or a natural weapon takes 1d8 points of  Evocation [see text] Level: Blackguard 2, cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youcalluponyourbeliefsandagreatpairof handsappearsaroundyourtarget,cradling it in its power. The effect fades, but your target brieﬂy glows with a healthy orange nimbus. If your deity is non-evil, this spell grants a +2 sacred bonus on saving throws, and the spell is a good spell. If your deity is evil, this spell grants a +2 profane bonus on saving throws, and the spell is an evil spell. This spell works only on a creature with the same deity as you or the same alignment as your deity. If cast on a target that does not meet this criteria, the spell has no effect.  HAND OF THE FAITHFUL  Abjuration [see text] Level: Cleric 4, paladin 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You summon the protective ﬁeld, and the shimmering border limns out along the ﬂoor,carryingwithittheephemeralimage of blocking hands. You create an immobile zone of warding that is permeable to those of your religion but repels all others. Creatures that have the same deity as you, or are  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One frigid globe/5 levels Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  HAND OF DIVINITY  wearing the holy symbol of your deity, can enter and move within the warded area unhindered. Other creatures that try to enter or move within the area must make a Fortitude save each round or be stunned for 1 round. If the creature’s only action is to try to move completely out of the area, the ward does not hinder it. Once a creature succeeds on its saving throw, it is no longer affected by that casting of hand of the faithful. This spell has the alignment components of your deity, so if your deity is good and lawful, this is a lawful and good spell.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  HAILSTONES  slashing and piercing damage from the subject’s barbs. This damage does not apply to attackers using reach weapons, such as longspears. The subject itself is not harmed by its own barbs. Arcane Material Component: A barb from a hamatula.  HARDENING  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One item of a volume no greater than 10 cu. ft./level; see text Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You rub your hands along the length of the object, intoning the spell. A warm red glowemitsfromyourhands,strengthening the object. This spell increases the hardness of materials. Paper becomes harder to tear, glass becomes harder to break, wood becomes more resilient, and so on. For every two caster levels, add 1 point of hardness to the material targeted by the spell. This hardness increase improves only the material’s resistance to damage. Nothing else is modiﬁed by the improvement. For example, a longsword (treat steel as iron, base hardness 10) affected by a hardening spell cast by a 12th-level caster would have hardness 16 for the purpose of ignoring damage caused by someone making a sunder attack. The sword’s hit points, attack and damage modiﬁers, and other factors are not affected. A hardening spell does not in any way affect a substance’s resistance to other forms of transformation. Ice still melts, paper and wood still burn, rock still becomes transmutable to mud with the proper spell, and so on.  109  This spell affects up to 10 cubic feet of material per level of the caster. If cast upon a metal or mineral, the spell affects only 1 cubic foot per level. Material Component: An ointment made with 50 gp of diamond dust per 10 cubic feet of material.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  HARMONIC CHORUS  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes Sweeping your arm as if presenting a gift to someone, you call out to the intended subjectofyourspell.Amantleofsweettones settlesaboutyoursubject,whosefaceisnow twisted in concentration. Harmonic chorus lets you improve the spellcasting ability of another spellcaster. For the duration of the spell, the subject gains a +2 morale bonus to caster level and a +2 morale bonus on save DCs for all spells it casts. Focus: A tuning fork.  HASTE, SWIFT  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1d4 rounds Two quick syllables release the power of the spell, and the world moves a bit slower about you. This spell functions like haste (PH 239), except as noted above. This spell counters and dispels any slow effect on you.  HAUNTING TUNE  110  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Thespellwrappedwithinyourmusicmakes even the most hard-hearted quail. Targets that fail their saves become shaken.  HAWKEYE  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Bycryingoutlikeahawk,youimproveyour eyesight.Distantobjectsandcreaturesseem closer and more distinct. Your range increment for ranged weapons increases by 50%, and you gain a +5 competence bonus on Spot checks.  HEAL ANIMAL COMPANION  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Druid 5, ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Your animal companion touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youlayyourhandonyouranimalcompanion,andasyoudo,itseyesbecomeclearand focused, and it breathes easier. This spell functions like heal (PH 239), except that it affects only your animal companion.  HEALING LORECALL  Divination Level: Cleric 2, druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level With a mint leaf under your tongue, you whisper quiet words of soothing comfort. You feel a divine touch guiding your healing hand. A caster with 5 or more ranks in Heal can, when casting a conjuration (healing) spell, choose to remove any one of the following conditions affecting the subject of the spell, in addition to the spell’s normal effects: dazed, dazzled, or fatigued. A caster with 10 or more ranks in Heal can choose from the following conditions in addition to those above: exhausted, nauseated, or sickened. Also, when determining the amount of damage healed by your conjuration (healing) spells, you can substitute your total ranks in Heal for your caster level. The normal caster level limit for individual spells still applies; thus, a 3rd-level cleric with 6 ranks in Heal when under the effect of healing lorecall cures 1d8+5 points of damage with a cure light wounds spell. Material Component: A mint leaf.  HEALING STING  Necromancy Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: You and one living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Your palms tingle as you smash the dead wasps between your hands. The tingling intensiﬁes as you strike the opposing warrior, pulling his vitality into yourself. Focusing the power of negative energy, you deal 1d12 points of damage +1 per caster level (maximum 1d12+10) to a living creature and gain an equal amount of hit points if you make a successful melee touch attack. A healing sting cannot give you more hit points than your full normal total. Excess hit points are lost. Material Component: Five dried wasp bodies.  HEALING TOUCH  HEALTHFUL REST  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Adiffuseglowofgoldenlightspreadsfrom you, wrapping those you have chosen in a softnimbus.Thesubjectsofyourspelllook relaxed and rested, the stresses of the day forgotten.  Collecting material components can be a laborious process, so alchemists often offer them for sale  HEART OF STONE Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, F, XP Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 year  You feel a hard shove from within your chestasyouﬁnallycompletethecomplicated  Illus. by W. England  You transfer some of your life essence to the subject of the spell, healing it. You can heal up to 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6), and you decide how many dice to roll when you cast the spell. You take damage equal to half the amount your subject was healed. This spell cannot heal a subject of more damage than your current hit points +10, which is enough to kill you.  You exchange your own living heart for a ﬁnely crafted heart of perfect, unblemished stone, altering the nature of your body. Your living heart can be stored or hidden anywhere you like, where it continues to beat for the duration of the spell. While under the effect of heart of stone, you gain damage reduction 5/— and resistance to cold 5, ﬁre 5, and electricity 5, but are subject to the following disadvantages. Your rate of natural healing slows to only 1 hit point per day (regardless of character level or whether you rest). In addition, your own living heart is susceptible to attack; if it is damaged or destroyed, you are instantly slain. Heart of stone can be dispelled, in which case your living heart instantly returns to its proper place while the stone heart is transported to the place where you left your heart. Your heart and the stone heart likewise switch places if you enter an antimagic ﬁeld (temporarily negating the spell’s effects), but the spell resumes when you leave it. Stone to ﬂesh can also end the spell, though you get a Fortitude saving throw to resist. Focus: A carved stone heart of exceptional quality (jade, obsidian, or goldveined marble) worth 5,000 gp. XP Cost: 500 XP.  CHAPTER 1  The skin of your hands turns translucent,showingthemuscle and bone beneath. You touch your badly injured ally and feel yourownvitalityleaveyourbody and enter his damaged form.  phrasesandintricatemotionsofthistaxing spell. Sweat beads on your forehead and your breath comes shallow and fast. The rhythmic rush of sound in your ears that usuallyaccompaniessuchheavyphysical exertion is disquietingly absent.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Healthful rest doubles the subjects’ natural healing rate. Each affected creature regains twice the hit points and ability damage it otherwise would have regained during that day, depending on its activity level (PH 76).  HEART RIPPER  Necromancy [Death] Level: Assassin 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  111  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The assassin didn’t even bother to speak to the guards before he killed them with a heart ripper spell  Withasweepofyourhand,invisiblemagic slams into your target. With a bloody pop and squelch, the heart of your target bursts out its back, dropping the creature like a discarded rag doll. Invisible bolts of force instantly slay the target you designate by driving its heart from its body unless it succeeds on a Fortitude save. If the target has HD higher than your caster level, it does not die on a failed saving throw, but instead is stunned for 1d4 rounds. Creatures that don’t depend on their hearts for survival, creatures with no anatomy, and creatures immune to extra damage from critical hits are unaffected by the spell.  HEARTFIRE  Evocation [Light, Fire] Level: Bard 2, druid 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: Living creatures within a 5-ft.radius burst Duration: 1 round/level  112  Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes A ﬂickering red ﬁre bursts in the area you intended. Creatures in the area are outlinedintheﬂame,somemoreintensely than others. Outlined subjects shed light as torches. Outlined creatures do not beneﬁt from the concealment normally provided by darkness (although a 3rd-level or higher magical darkness effect functions normally),blur,displacement,invisibility, or similar effects. In addition, if they fail a Fortitude save, affected creatures take 1d4 points of ﬁre damage each round as their passions manifest as physically damaging ﬁre. Creatures that make a successful Fortitude save take only half damage each round for the duration of the spell (minimum 1 point per round). Spellcasters affected by this spell who try to cast spells must make Concentration checks (DC 10 + half the continuous damage last dealt) each round as they take continuous damage from the spell. The ﬁre created by this spell can be extinguished  by normal means; doing so ends the outlining effect.  HEAT DRAIN  Necromancy [Cold] Level: Cleric 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes The heat in the room seems to rush toward you,leavingeveryonearoundyouinbonechilling pain while you feel amazingly refreshed and alive. You drain the heat from all living creatures within the affected area except you. This inﬂux of warmth heals and empowers you. All affected living creatures take 1d6 points of cold damage per caster level (maximum 20d6). For every living creature that takes damage from this spell, you gain 2 temporary  hit points. The temporary hit points last for up to 1 minute per level.  HEATSTROKE  If the target creature fails to resist the spell, it immediately becomes fatigued. If it is already fatigued, it instead becomes exhausted. The subject takes 2d6 points of nonlethal damage from the oppressive heat as well, even if it makes the Fortitude saving throw to avoid fatigue or exhaustion. A creature wearing heavy armor takes a –4 penalty on its save. Creatures with immunity or resistance to ﬁre are not affected by this spell.  HEAVENLY HOST  Conjuration (Summoning) [Good, Lawful] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You invoke this spell and heavenly rays lance down from above. Out of these sparklingraysmanifestgreatglowingballs of power. The shadows of greater warriors coalesce within this light. When the spell is complete, 2d4 lantern archons (MM 16) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 hound archons (MM 17) appear. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil, Lawful] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Awaveofspectralﬁreburstsforth,andout ofthecurlingsmokestepsthehunchedform ofabarbazu,followedbyasecond,andother shadowy forms loom behind them. When the spell is complete, 2d4 bearded devils (MM 52) appear. Ten minutes later, 1d4 chain devils (MM 53) appear. Ten minutes after that, one bone devil (MM 52) appears. Each creature has maximum hit points per Hit Die. Once these creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell. The devils obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the devils. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  HERALD’S CALL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Any creature with 5 Hit Dice or less is slowed (PH 280) for 1 round. Creatures beyond the radius of the burst might hear the shout, but they are not slowed. An affected creature under the effect of a haste spell has the haste spell suppressed (not dispelled) for 1 round.  HEROICS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  With a wave of your hand and a few hissedwords,youcausethetargetcreature to suffer as if it had been toiling for hours on end under the merciless hammer of the desert sun.  HELLISH HORDE  By placing your hand to your mouth and calling out, you gain the attention of creatures around you. For a moment, all eyes snaptoyou.Somecreaturesseemreluctant or unable to pull their eyes away.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  creatures appear, they serve you for the duration of the spell. The creatures obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the creatures. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time.  Your heart swells with martial vigor and you feel like marching off to war. Upon touching your intended subject the desire to do battle wanes, but you see a hint of the lust for glory in the recipient’s eyes. The heroics spell temporarily grants the subject a feat from the ﬁghter’s bonus feat list. For the duration of the heroics spell, the subject can use the feat as if it were one of those the creature had selected. All prerequisites for the feat must be met by the target of this spell. Material Component: A bit of a weapon or armor that has been used in combat by a ﬁghter of at least 15th level.  HIDDEN LODGE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F; see text Duration: 24 hours You picture in your mind the desired appearanceofacamouﬂagedlodgeevenas youcompletethemotionsandwordsofthe spell.Whenyouﬁnish,youopenyoureyes and note a new feature in the landscape roughly the size of a house.  This spell functions like Leomund’s secure shelter (PH 247), except as noted here. The house created by hidden lodge  113  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  is perfectly camouﬂaged to blend in with whatever terrain or surroundings are appropriate. It might appear as a house-sized boulder in a rocky or mountainous area, as a sand dune in the desert, as a densely tangled thicket, a grassy knoll, or even a mighty tree. The lodge also obscures all telltale signs of habitation, including any smoke, light, or sound coming from within. At any distance of more than 30 feet, the lodge is indistinguishable from natural terrain. Any creature approaching within 30 feet is entitled to a DC 30 Survival check to spot the hidden lodge as an artiﬁcial dwelling and not a natural part of the landscape. Focus: The focus of an alarm spell (silver wire and a tiny bell), if this beneﬁt is to be included in the hidden lodge (see Leomund’s secure shelter for more information).  HIDE FROM DRAGONS  Abjuration Level: Assassin 4, bard 5, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature touched/ 2 levels Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Silently you make the motions and the dragon’s scale smolders in your hand. The rising smoke wraps around you and sinks into your skin. Dragons cannot see, hear, or smell the warded creatures, even with blindsense. They act as though the warded creatures are not there. Warded creatures could stand before the hungriest of red dragons and not be molested or even noticed. If a warded character touches or attacks a dragon or the dragon’s hoard, even with a spell, the spell ends for all recipients. Material Component: A dragon scale.  HIDE THE PATH  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6, druid 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes  114  Range: Anywhere in the area to be warded Area: Up to 200 sq. ft./level (S) Duration: 24 hours (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No After what feels like an hour, you ﬁnish the chant and rest your hands on the onyx sphere, envisioning the places you wish to protect from those seeking your secrets. Hide the path wards a large, continuous area against divination magic. The ward protects 200 square feet per caster level and can be shaped as you desire. The warded area can be as much as 20 feet high. Find the path won’t function in an area warded by hide the path. In addition, any spellcaster attempting to cast a 1st- through 6th-level divination spell in the warded area must make a caster level check (DC 11 + your caster level) or the spell fails. Higher-level divinations function normally. Hide the path has no effect on divination spells cast outside the warded area. Focus: A 6-inch onyx sphere mounted upon an obsidian stand; the entire focus must be worth no less than 1,000 gp. Any creature in physical contact with the focus can cast divination spells without restriction from the hide the path effect. If the focus is destroyed or brought beyond the boundaries of the hide the path spell, the spell is immediately dismissed.  HINDSIGHT  Divination Level: Bard 6, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 60 ft. Area: 60-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Therigorousritualofthespellﬁnallydraws to a close. You breathe a sigh of relief even asphantomimagesappearbeforeyoureyes, moving in reverse. Suddenly they cease their movements and seem more real. You watchasthephantomimagesplayouttheir partsinquicksuccession,showingyouthe knowledge of the past you seek.  You can see and hear into the past, getting a look at events that happened previously at your current location. The level of detail you see and hear by means of this spell depends on the span of time you wish to observe; concentrating on a span of days renders a more detailed perspective than a span of centuries, for example. You can view only one span of time per casting, chosen from the following options. Days: You sense the events of the past, stretching back one day per caster level. You gain detailed knowledge of the people, conversations, and events that transpired. Weeks: You gain a summary of the events of the past, stretching back one week per caster level. Exact wording and details are lost, but you know all the participants and the highlights of the conversations and events that took place. Years: You gain a general idea of the events of the past, stretching back one year per caster level. You notice only noteworthy events such as deaths, battles, scenes of great emotion, important discoveries, and signiﬁcant happenings. Centuries: You gain a general idea of the events of the past, stretching back one century plus an additional century for every four caster levels beyond 1st. For instance, a 16th-level caster would gain insight into the events of four centuries in the past, and a 17th-level caster would see back across ﬁve centuries. You notice only the most remarkable of events: coronations, deaths of important personages, major battles, and other truly historic happenings. Material Component: An hourglass-shaped diamond worth at least 1,000 gp.  HISS OF SLEEP  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: No From your hiding place, you whisper the spell softly, your words taking on a  HOLY MOUNT  Transmutation Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Your special mount Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Touching your special mount, you feel the divine power seep into your trusted friend and watch as a golden nimbus surrounds it. Your special mount gains the celestial template (MM 31) for the duration of the spell.  HOLY SPURS Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V  Youinvoketheholypowersandyourmount’s legs glow with a brilliant yellow radiance. This spell increases your special mount’s base land speed by 40 feet. This adjustment is treated as an enhancement bonus.  HOLY STAR  Abjuration Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Protective star of energy Duration: 3 rounds (D) By calling upon the power of your deity, you bring into existence a glowing mote of energy near your shoulder. While no brighter than a candle, the mote of light ﬁlls your body with an inner warmth and feeling of reassuring protection. You create a glowing mote of energy that stays near your shoulder, providing  HOLY STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Good, Water] Level: Cleric 3, paladin 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft. Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  The targets of this spell fall into a comatose slumber. Sleeping creatures are helpless. Slapping or wounding the subjects awakens them, but normal noise does not. Awakening a creature is a standard action.  Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Your special mount Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Illus. by J. Thomas  sonorous drone. One by one, your foes drop to ground, asleep.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The holy mount spell bolsters a paladin’s special mount with many useful resistances  light equal to that of a candle. This star has the following three functions, and you can designate which function to activate as a free action on your turn. Spell Turning: A holy star can turn a total of four to seven (1d4+3) spell levels, as the spell turning spell (PH 282). Any turning potential depleted through this use remains so for the duration of the spell; the holy star does not return to full capacity every time you choose this function. If its entire spell turning capacity is expended, this function no longer works, but the others do. Protection: A holy star gives you a +6 circumstance bonus to AC. Fire Bolt: A holy star lashes out with a beam of energy as a ranged touch attack against a creature (you choose the target) up to 90 feet away (no range increment). This attack uses your attack bonus and deals ﬁre damage equal to 1d6 points per two caster levels (maximum 10d6).  Youcallupontheforcesofgood,andaheavy rainbeginstofallaroundyou,itsraindrops soft and warm. A driving rain falls around you. It falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages evil creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (evil outsiders take double damage) at the beginning of your turn. Material Component: A ﬂask of holy water (25 gp).  115  HOLY TRANSFORMATION  Illus., by M. Cotie  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation [Good] Level: Cleric 7  This spell functions like lesser holy transformation, but when you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a hound archon (MM 16). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (archon, good, lawful), and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a hound archon (5 feet/5 feet). You gain a +4 sacred bonus to Strength and Constitution. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You gain a +4 sacred bonus on saving throws. You gain damage reduction 5/evil. Evil creatures within 10 feet of you take a –2 penalty on attack rolls and saving throws. You gain the ability to speak and understand Celestial.  Achargeofholyenergycoursesthroughyou, causing a barely visible golden aura to surroundyou.Youfeelaclosenesstoyourdeity as well as a noticeable increase in physical girth and power. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a protectar (Miniatures Handbook 66). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (good), and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a protectar (5 feet/5 feet). You gain a +2 sacred bonus to Strength and Constitution. You gain a ﬂy speed of 60 feet (good). You gain darkvision out to 60 feet.  Any creature that bites the spell’s subject must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or be nauseated until the end of its next turn. If a creature of animal Intelligence (2 or lower) fails its saving throw, it will not willingly bite the subject a second time; someone trying to direct the creature to bite the subject again must make a Handle Animal check as if he was trying to “push” the creature. This check must be made every time he tries to make the creature bite. Creatures that are immune to poison or that lack the ability to taste are unaffected by this spell. Material Component: A pinch of rotten meat.  HOWLING CHAIN  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One chain of force Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  HOLY TRANSFORMATION, LESSER Transmutation [Good] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  116  You gain a +2 sacred bonus on saving throws. You gain the ability to speak and understand Celestial.  A blood-red chain of pure force appears, howling instead of rattling as it shakes and twines.  Howling chain is tremendously useful against enemy spellcasters  HORRIBLE TASTE  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature or object touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No Afterafewmysticwords,youtouchapiece of rotten meat to the subject and it sinks inside the creature’s body.  You create a chain of force, which lashes out and attacks your enemies. The chain has a reach of 15 feet, but cannot move from the space you designate. The chain attacks by attempting to trip your foes (+12 melee touch attack, +15 on the opposed Strength check). It does not provoke attacks of opportunity for tripping, nor can it be tripped in response on a failed attempt. If it succeeds in tripping an enemy, it immediately follows up with a melee attack on the prone defender (+12 melee attack, 2d6+10 points of damage). Any creature struck by the chain must make a Will saving throw or become shaken. A howling chain can make one attack of opportunity each round for every four caster levels you have, using the same tactic as above. A howling chain has as many hit points as you do when you’re undam-  aged, and its AC is AC 20 (–1 size, +11 natural). It takes damage as a normal creature, but most magical effects that don’t deal damage do not affect it. It makes saving throws as its caster. Disintegrate or a successful dispel magic destroys it. Focus: A small length of platinum chain worth at least 500 gp.  Whatappearstobeamassivegizzardfrom a bird attempts to consume a creature you indicate. The gizzard pulses with glowing red blood and supernatural energy. A Large bulbous, ﬂeshy mass seethes into being around a single Medium or smaller target within range. The target can make a Reﬂex save to avoid becoming engulfed by the hungry gizzard, otherwise it is entombed within the disembodied digestive organ. If the target successfully saves, the gizzard immediately vanishes without further effect. Each round a creature remains trapped inside a hungry gizzard (starting in the round the spell is cast), the target creature is considered grappled and takes 2d8+8 points of crushing damage per round and 1d8 points of acid damage. While engulfed, the target creature can cast a spell only if the spell has no somatic component, the material components are in hand, and it makes a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level). An engulfed creature can cut its way out by using claws or a light slashing weapon to deal 25 points of damage to the gizzard (AC 12). Once the creature exits, the gizzard immediately melts into a pool of blood and meaty chunks. There is no immediate physical exit; the only way for those trapped inside to escape is to cut their way free, to dispel the spell, or to have allies outside destroy the gizzard. The gizzard is fairly easy to strike in combat from  HUNTERS OF HADES  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Cleric 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Two summoned pack ﬁends, which can be no more than 30 ft. apart, or one retriever Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You evoke the dark powers and the ground splitsnearyou.Upfromthesmokingdepths comesapairofcreatures,eachresemblinga mating of wolf and cockroach. This spell summons either a single retriever (MM 46) or a pair of pack ﬁends (Planar Handbook 128) from the Gray Waste of Hades to serve you. The creatures magically understand your spoken commands (regardless of your language). They are treated as trained hunting beasts, so you can command them to track if you so choose. The creatures obey you explicitly and never attack you, even if someone else manages to gain control over them. You do not need to concentrate to maintain control over the creatures. You can dismiss them singly or in groups at any time. Material Component: A pinch of ash. If a retriever is summoned, a 500 gp bloodstone must also be used.  HUNTER’S MERCY  Transmutation Level: Ranger 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Youreyesglowred,butyouseetheworldas normalexceptwhenyoulookatyourtarget.  This transmutation makes a bow strike true. Your ﬁrst hit with a bow (not including crossbows) in the next round is automatically a critical hit. If you don’t hit in the round following the casting of this spell, the effect is wasted.  HURL  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  A small glowing dot reveals the creature’s weakest point.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  HUNGRY GIZZARD  a vantage point outside of its interior, due to its size (AC 4). A newly formed hungry gizzard has 5 hit points per caster level. The gizzard is treated like an unattended object for the purpose of saving throws. A hungry gizzard reduced to 0 hit points is immediately destroyed. Material Component: A dried gizzard.  Youpicturewithyourmind’seyethetarget weapon returning to its owner. Upon completion of the spell, the weapon glows with a dull yellow radiance. The hurl spell enhances one melee weapon so that it returns to the thrower after being thrown. For the duration of the spell, when thrown, the weapon returns to its wielder at the beginning of the wielder’s next action. The weapon returns whether it hit or missed its target. On its return, the thrown weapon hovers for 1 round next to the wielder and can then be seized and thrown again. After 1 round, the weapon falls to the ground. The weapon returns to its wielder only if thrown; it doesn’t automatically ﬂy back if dropped or seized by another creature. (An improvised weapon or a weapon not designed for throwing has a range increment of 10 feet.) Throwing a two-handed weapon is a full-round action.  HYMN OF PRAISE  Evocation [Good, Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 50 ft. Area: 50-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  117  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Yourheartlightandjoyful,youfeelasense of optimism as you launch into an inspiring melody. You can strike up a rousing, inspirational song that temporarily boosts by 2 the effective caster level of each goodaligned divine spellcaster within range. This increase does not grant access to additional spells, but it does improve all spell effects that are dependent on caster level. Within the spell’s area, each good-aligned divine spellcaster gains a +4 sacred bonus on Charisma checks to turn undead, and each evilaligned divine spellcaster takes a –4 sacred penalty on Charisma checks to rebuke undead.  This spell creates a battleaxe-shaped formation of jagged, fast-swirling ice shards in your hand. You are automatically considered proﬁcient with the ice axe. Attacks with the ice axe are melee touch attacks. The axe deals 2d12 points of cold damage +1 point per two caster levels (maximum +10) with a successful hit. You cannot be disarmed of the ice axe nor can it be sundered. Since the axe is virtually weightless, your Strength modiﬁer does not apply on  Illus. by W. England  HYPOTHERMIA  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 4, druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./ 2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes The ﬁghter drops to her knees, her face pale and a bluish cast to her lips and ﬁngers. A cloud of frosted breath escapes her lips as she whispers, “So . . . c-c-cold . . .” The subject takes 1d6 points of cold damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) and becomes fatigued. A successful Fortitude save halves the damage and negates the fatigue.  ICE AXE  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: Battleaxe-shaped weapon of swirling ice Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A thin layer of frost forms around your hand as shards of ice descend from the sky and coalesce into the form of a battleaxe.  118  Dwarf clerics employ the ice axe spell when ﬁghting ﬁery foes  damage rolls. If your base attack bonus is high enough to allow for multiple attacks in a round, you can make them with the ice axe. If you choose to hold something other than the ice axe in your hand or use the hand in some other way, the ice axe vanishes until the hand is empty again. Material Component: A shard of ice, glass, or crystal.  ICE CLAW  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 10-ft. ice claw Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You ﬁnish this evocation and a great white clawappearsbeforeyou,coldairwaftingoff its crystalline surface. This spell creates a massive reptilian claw made of ice. The ice claw can make one grapple attack per round. Its attack bonus and grapple modiﬁer are equal to your caster level + your Int modiﬁer or Cha modiﬁer (for wizards and sorcerers, respectively) + 7 for the claw’s Strength (24). In any round when the claw is grappling a target, it deals 1d8 points of cold damage. The claw can attack in the round it appears. Directing it to change targets is a standard action. It always attacks from your direction and does not get a ﬂanking bonus or help a combatant get one. The claw has as many hit points as you do when undamaged and has AC 20 (+10 natural). It takes damage as a normal creature, but most magical effects that do not deal damage do not affect it. The claw cannot push through a wall of force or enter an antimagic ﬁeld. It suffers the full effects of a prismatic wall or prismatic sphere. The claw has your saving throw bonuses. Disintegrate or a successful dispel magic destroys it. It has immunity to cold and vulnerability to ﬁre. Focus: A white leather glove and a piece of clear rock crystal.  ICE DAGGER  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Dagger of ice Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Themeltedicecuppedinyourpalmcrystallizes into a daggerlike shard of ice that then  ﬂies at your foe, exploding into a ball of icy fragments at its feet.  You can attack with your ﬁst in all respects as if you were wearing a +1 spiked gauntlet. The  ICELANCE  A lance of ice and earth thrusts up where you point, ﬂinging pebbles, rocks, and dirt into the sky. Stone rains down, covering the ground with debris. This spell causes moisture in the ground at a point you designate to freeze into a mound of solid ice covered by a layer of soil, which bursts violently through the surface. This ﬂings dangerous ice shards and small stones throughout the area, turning the surface of the ground in the spell’s area into dense rubble (DMG 90). The shards and stones deal 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6). Half the damage is cold damage. The origin point of the spell must be on the ground. This spell has no effect in desert terrain or on solid stone.  ICE GAUNTLET  Evocation [Cold] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  An icelance spell pins a gnoll to a tree  +1 spiked gauntlet deals normal damage for your size and 1d4 points of cold damage. Damage reduction applies to the ice gauntlet’s normal damage, but it does not affect the cold damage. If you fail a saving throw against a ﬁre effect, the ice gauntlet melts and the spell ends.  ICE KNIFE  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Assassin 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: One icy missile Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial or Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One lance of ice Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by J. Nelson  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 6, druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No  You must succeed on a normal ranged attack to hit (with a +2 bonus on the attack roll for every two caster levels). If it hits, an ice knife deals 2d8 points of cold damage and 2 points of Dexterity damage (a successful Fortitude save negates the Dexterity damage). Creatures that have immunity to cold also take no Dexterity damage automatically. A knife that misses creates a shower of ice crystals in a 10foot-radius burst (see Missing with a Thrown Weapon, PH 158, to determine where the shard hits). The icy burst deals 1d8 points of cold damage to all creatures within the area (Reﬂex half). Material Component: A drop of water or piece of ice.  CHAPTER 1  ICE FLOWERS  You shake your hand as if to free it from some substance you disdain. As you do, a magical shard of ice blasts from your hand andspeedstoitstarget,thesoundofcracking ice following in its wake.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The ice dagger created by this spell launches itself at a target. Treat the attack as a thrown splash weapon (PH 158) that requires a ranged touch attack to hit. The ice dagger deals 1d4 points of cold damage to the target per caster level (maximum 5d4), and splash damage of 1 point of cold damage to adjacent creatures. MaterialComponent:Afew drops of water made from melted ice.  All warmth leaves your hand as at ﬁrst a sheen of white frost covers it, then larger crystals of clear ice form around it. In seconds a large bristling ball of rock-hard ice spikes surrounds your ﬁst, a cold mist enshrouding your forearm.  Youclutchthequartzinyourhand,focusing the energy of the spell into a sharp spear. With a thought, you send it whistling through the air at your foe. You must succeed on a normal ranged attack to strike a target with an icelance. You gain a +4 bonus on your attack roll. If you hit, the icelance deals 6d6 points of damage to the target. Half of this damage is piercing damage; the rest is cold damage. In addition, the target must make a Fortitude save or be stunned for 1d4 rounds. Regardless of the result of the attack, the icelance shatters upon its ﬁrst use. Focus: A 50-gp clear quartz gemstone. Alternatively, if you are in a cold region, you can substitute 10 pounds of ice or snow for the quartz.  119  ILLUSORY FEAST  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Illusion (Pattern) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your stomach growls as an entire feast appears in the distance. You perceive the composition of the feast continuously shifting,itscontentssometimesappealing to the point where you almost forget it is an illusion. Tantalizing food and drink appears, causing creatures in the area to stop what they are doing and eat. A creature in the area that fails its save stops its current activities, drops held or carried items, and begins consuming the illusory food and drink. The food looks, feels, smells, tastes, and even sounds real to the affected creature, and it appears to be whatever kind of food the creature prefers. The creature is considered dazed. An attack on an affected creature frees it from the spell immediately. Sightless creatures are affected by this spell due to its effect on all the senses. Creatures that do not eat are unaffected by this spell. Material Component: A piece of trail rations.  ILLUSORY PIT  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft. cube/level Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Will disbelief Spell Resistance: No You shove downward with your hand, speaking the spell’s arcane words as you do so. The ground disappears where you indicate, forming an impossibly deep pit. You create the illusion of a pit, and each creature entering or within the area is forced to make a Will save or believe the ﬂoor on which it stands has become a  120  bottomless chasm. Those that fail their saves fall prone and are unable to take any action except clawing desperately at the ﬂoor in the hopes of stopping their apparent fall. An attack on an affected creature frees it from the effect of the illusion but leaves it stunned for 1 round. Likewise, when the spell ends, creatures that believed they were falling are stunned for 1 round. Flying creatures passing over an illusory pit are unaffected by the spell.  IMBUE FAMILIAR WITH SPELL ABILITY Universal Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Familiar touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Upon completion of this spell, you feel as if you had just cast a number of spells in quick succession. Your familiar gives you a knowing nod. This spell allows you to transfer a number of your spells and the ability to cast them into your familiar. Spontaneous spellcasters, such as sorcerers, can imbue a familiar with any spells they know how to cast, subject to the restrictions below. Arcanists who prepare spells, such as wizards, can imbue a familiar with any spell they have currently prepared. In either case, you can imbue one spell per three caster levels, with a maximum spell level of one-third your caster level, rounded down (maximum 5th level). Multiple castings of imbue familiar with spell ability have no effect on these limits. The transferred spell’s variable characteristics (range, duration, area, and so on) function according to your level. Once you cast imbue familiar with spell ability on your familiar, both the spell slot from which you cast the spell and the spell slots of the transferred spells remain unavailable for the preparation or casting of new spells until the familiar uses the transferred spells or imbue familiar with spell ability expires.  The spell can be dispelled; if this happens, the spells transferred are lost as if the familiar had cast them. In an antimagic ﬁeld, the familiar loses the ability to cast the imbued spells, but regains it again if it leaves the ﬁeld (as long as the spell’s duration hasn’t expired). If any transferred spell requires a focus or material component, you must have it on your person when the spells are cast (components are consumed as normal without requiring you to bring them to hand). Any XP costs from a transferred spell are deducted from your total when the familiar casts the spell.  IMPERIOUS GLARE  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One living creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youregardyourfoeswithasteelyglarethat would peel paint from a wagon. Motes of darkenergydancebeforeyoureyesandthey, to a body, freeze in fear. The targets must make successful Will saves or cower. The saving throw DC to resist this effect is either the normal save DC for the spell or the save DC for your natural frightful presence ability, whichever is higher. You cannot cast this spell if you do not have a frightful presence ability, either natural or magically bestowed (such as from the aura of terror spell, for example).  IMPLACABLE PURSUER  Divination Level: Assassin 4, blackguard 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level); see text Target: One creature Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  With this spell, you become an unerring tracker, instantly aware of your quarry’s location whenever it’s on the move.  Transmutation Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Withanelaborateﬂourishandcallforluck, you toss the dice in your hand into the air. Immediatelyyoufeelasthoughfatefavors you, ﬁlling you with conﬁdence. You gain access to a ﬂoating “pool” of luck, which manifests as bonus points you can use as desired to improve your odds of success at various tasks. This bonus pool consists of 2 points per caster level, which you can spend as you like to improve attack rolls, skill checks, and ability checks, although no single check can receive a bonus greater than one-half your caster level. You must declare any bonus point usage before the appropriate roll is made. Used points disappear from the pool, and any points remaining when the spell ends are wasted. These points count as luck bonuses for the purpose of stacking. For example, a 14th-level bard pauses while chasing a pickpocket to cast improvisation. At any time during the next 14 rounds, he could use the points to provide himself a +7 luck bonus on a  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Creatures in a 10-ft. burst Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast this spell and your opponent is swallowed in a spiral of sparkling motes that urge your targets to act. Affected creatures are not allowed to delay or to ready an action. If a subject is currently delaying, it acts as soon as the spell is cast. If the subject currently has an action readied, it loses that action.  INCORPOREAL ENHANCEMENT  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One incorporeal undead/ level Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Calling upon the dark power of the Plane of Negative Energy, you bolster the power of incorporeal undead. The undead affected by this spell gain a +1 deﬂection bonus to Armor Class, +1d8 bonus hit points, a +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls, and a +2 bonus to turn resistance. Each of these enhancements improves by the base amount for every ﬁve caster levels beyond 5th, so that a 20th-level caster grants undead +4 to AC, +4d8 bonus hit points, +4 on attack rolls, and +8 to turn resistance.  Necromancy [Death] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 50-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes A novaofdissolutiondissipates theimmaterial bodies of incorporeal and gaseous creatures, destroying them instantly. The spell destroys 1d4 HD worth of creatures per caster level (maximum 20d4) in the area. Usually, creatures such as shadows, wraiths, spectres, ghosts, and similar creatures are destroyed, though vampires and living creatures in gaseous form are also affected, as are other incorporeal creatures. Creatures with the fewest HD are affected ﬁrst; among creatures with equal HD, those that are closest to the point of origin of the burst are affected ﬁrst. No creature with 9 or more HD is affected, and HD that are not sufﬁcient to affect a creature are wasted.  CHAPTER 1  IMPROVISATION  INCITE  INCORPOREAL NOVA  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The implacable pursuer spell gives you the direction and distance to the target creature whenever it ﬁnishes a turn more than 10 feet away from where it started. If you are a ranger, you apply your favored enemy bonus to the DC of the Will save. Once you successfully target a creature with implacable pursuer, you know its location as long as the subject is moving, no matter where it goes on the same plane. Even if it leaves the plane, implacable pursuer tells you what plane the subject creature went to. The spell then provides no further information until you and the subject creature are on the same plane, in which case the spell resumes functioning normally.  Spot check, a +7 luck bonus on a Climb check, and a +7 luck bonus on two of his attacks. Material Component: A pair of dice.  INDOMITABILITY  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level or until discharged Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Thespell’senergymakesyoufeelimpervious to wounds, if only for a limited time. The indomitability spell protects its recipient from the ﬁrst incapacitating attack the creature suffers during the spell’s duration. An incapacitating attack is one that would reduce the recipient to fewer than 1 hit point. The attack must be one that deals damage; the indomitability spell offers no protection from nondamaging effects or attacks that kill or destroy without dealing any damage, such as death effects. Regardless of how much  121  damage the attack deals, the recipient of the indomitability spell takes only enough damage to be reduced to 1 hp. The remaining damage from the attack is ignored. Once the spell protects the subject in this manner, the spell is discharged.  and reach of a bone devil (10 feet/10 feet). You gain a +4 profane bonus to Strength and Constitution and darkvision out to 60 feet. You gain damage reduction 5/good. You also grow a tail like that of a scorpion. Whenever you take a full  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  INFERNAL THRENODY Evocation [Evil, Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: 50 ft. Area: 50-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by C. Frank  INFERNAL TRANSFORMATION Transmutation [Evil] Level: Cleric 7  This spell functions like lesser infernal transformation, except when you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a bone devil (MM 52). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (baatezu, evil, lawful), and your size changes to Large. You have the space  122  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Your blood runs cold as a feeling of utter evil imbues you with unholy power. A cackle of sadisticgleeescapesyourchanging mouth, and you feel your body grow in both size and power.  Themelodyyoucreateisalowbut melodious dirge that blankets the area in a barely perceptible red aura. You feel invigorated with dark power. You can strike up a pulsing, powerful rhythm that temporarily boosts by 2 the effective caster level of each evil-aligned divine spellcaster within range. This increase does not grant access to additional spells, but it does improve all spell effects that are dependent on caster level. Within the spell’s area, each evil-aligned divine spellcaster gains a +4 profane bonus on Charisma checks to rebuke undead, and each good-aligned divine spellcaster takes a –4 profane penalty on Charisma checks to turn undead.  INFERNAL TRANSFORMATION, LESSER  Indominability makes a deadly blow merely dangerous  attack action, you can use the tail to make an additional attack each round at your highest attack bonus. A successful attack deals 3d4 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer. This attack overcomes damage reduction as if it were an evil weapon. Creatures hit by the tail attack must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 character level + Con modiﬁer) or be subjected to poison (injury, initial damage 1d6 Str, secondary damage 2d6 Str). Your equipment grows to match your new size and form, allowing the tail attack to function even if you are wearing heavy armor or other restrictive clothing. You gain the ability to speak and understand Infernal.  When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a bearded devil (MM 52). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to outsider (baatezu, evil, lawful), and your size changes to Medium. You have the space and reach of a bearded devil (5 feet/5 feet). You gain a +2 profane bonus to Strength and Constitution and darkvision out to 60 feet. You grow a snaky beard. Whenever you take a full attack action, you can use the beard to make an additional attack each round at your highest attack bonus plus all appropriate modiﬁers. A successful attack deals 1d8 points of damage + your Str modiﬁer. This attack overcomes damage reduction as if it were an evil weapon. Creatures hit by the beard attack must make a Fortitude saving throw (DC 10 + 1/2 character level + Con modiﬁer) or be affected by the devil chills disease (DMG 292). You gain the ability to speak and understand Infernal.  INFERNAL WOUND  Transmutation [Evil] Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You wave your hands over the blade and it takes on a gray pallor. Its attacks will now leave a lingering, painful memory in their wake.  INFERNO  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./ 2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 6 rounds; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates and Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast this spell and a spiral of dark motes surrounds your foe, slowing and distracting him from the task at hand.  INKY CLOUD  The infestation of maggots spell harms and horriﬁes its victims  Youtouchyourfoewiththedustofdeadﬂies onyourﬁngers,givingbirthtohundredsof writhing maggots in his ﬂesh. With a successful melee touch attack, you infest a creature with maggotlike creatures. If the touched creature fails a Fortitude saving throw, the magical maggots deal 1d4 points of Constitution damage each round at the beginning of your turn. The subject makes a new Fortitude save each round to negate the damage in that round and end the effect. The infestation can be removed with a remove disease or heal spell.  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by D. Martin  You inhibit your foe from acting. The subject is forced to delay until the following round, acting immediately before you on your initiative count.  Singling out the target, you call upon elemental forces to surround it in ﬁre. The target of the inferno takes 6d6 points of ﬁre damage unless it makes a Fortitude save. In each round thereafter, the ﬁre deals 1d6 fewer points of damage (minimum 1d6) until the spell ends or the subject manages to extinguish the ﬂames. Thus, the ﬁre deals 5d6 points of damage in the second round, 4d6 points in the third round, and so forth. Flammable, nonmagical items carried by the target automatically fail their saves to resist this damage. After the ﬁrst round, the subject can attempt a DC 15 Reﬂex save as a full-round action to extinguish the ﬂames before taking additional damage. Rolling on the ground (the subject becomes prone) allows the target a +2 bonus on this save. Leaping into a large body of water or magically extinguishing the ﬂames automatically ends the effect. Material Component: A gob of beeswax.  INHIBIT  CHAPTER 1  Necromancy Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/2 levels Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Material Component: A handful of dead, dried ﬂies.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A creature injured by a weapon with infernal wound cast upon it loses 2 additional hit points each round for the duration of the spell (regardless of how many times it is struck during that time). The continuing hit point loss can be stopped by a Heal check (DC 10 + spell level + your relevant ability modiﬁer), a cure spell, or a heal spell.  INFESTATION OF MAGGOTS  Blackbubblesofinkboilupfromthevialin your hand and quickly spread to ﬁll all the water around you with darkness, blocking your vision. You create an inky cloud that billows out from your location. The cloud obscures all sight, including darkvision, beyond 5 feet. A creature within 5 feet has concealment. Creatures farther away have total concealment. A moderate current disperses the cloud in 4 rounds; a strong current disperses the cloud in 1 round. This spell functions only underwater.  123  Material Component: A small vial containing the ink of a squid or octopus.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  INSIDIOUS RHYTHM  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You recite a foolhardy ditty, tapping your foot in time. With a wink and a grin you mark your target, who shortly thereafter follows suit. The subject takes a –4 penalty on Intelligence-based skill checks and Concentration checks due to an endlessly recycling melody stuck in its mind. Whenever the subject attempts to cast, concentrate on, or direct a spell, it must succeed on a Concentration check (DC equal to insidious rhythm’s save DC + spell’s level) or fail at the attempt.  INSIGHTFUL FEINT  Divination Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round With a chuckle you whisper the words that will make your ruse more effective. You gain a +10 insight bonus on the next single Bluff check that you make to feint in combat (if it is made before the start of your next turn). You can make the feint as a move action, or once as a free action if you have the Improved Feint feat.  INSPIRATIONAL BOOST Enchantment (Compulsion) [MindAffecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal  124  Target: You Duration: 1 round or special; see text Youconcentrateonassistingyourfriendsas youbegintheshortchantandsimplehandchoppingmotionnecessarytocastthespell. Asyouﬁnish,thespell’schantallowsyouto segue easily into bolstering your allies. While this spell is in effect, the morale bonus granted by your inspire courage bardic music increases by 1. The effect lasts until your inspire courage effect ends. If you don’t begin to use your inspire courage ability before the beginning of your next turn, the spell’s effect ends.  INSTANT LOCKSMITH  Divination Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round You point at a mechanism, twist your hand,andmakeaclickingsoundwithyour tongue. You now have a better idea of how the mechanism works. You can make one Disable Device check or one Open Lock check in this round as a free action. You gain a +2 insight bonus on the check.  INSTANT REFUGE  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Until discharged Yousetinvisiblearcanetriggerswithinyour mindandbody,allowingyoutoescapegreat peril in an instant. This powerful variant of the contingency spell automatically transfers you and everything you carry or touch (except for other creatures or objects that weigh more than 50 pounds) to a locale you name. When casting instant refuge, you must specify the locale and detail up to six  speciﬁc conditions that trigger the spell. When any of these situations occurs, you are whisked away to the location. The location can be any place you have visited, even on another plane. Material Component: A concoction made from demon skin and rare herbs worth 250 gp. XP Cost: 100 XP.  INSTANT SEARCH  Divination Level: Assassin 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round By pointing at a small area nearby and whistling brieﬂy, you release the power of the spell, granting you knowledge of the area you indicated. You can make one Search check in this round as a free action. You gain a +2 insight bonus on the check.  INTERPLANAR MESSAGE  Evocation [Language-Dependent] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: See text Target: One creature Duration: 24 hours/level or until discharged Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourspellcreatesabondbetweenyourself and the creature you touch, a bond unbroken even by the distance between planes. This spell allows you to send a limited message of twenty-ﬁve words or less to the targeted creature, who can be on another plane when the message is received. Casting the spell takes a standard action, during which you touch the creature you intend to communicate with. That creature should be able to understand a language you know (otherwise, when the magic is activated, the creature knows that you sent the message, but has  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: You plus one willing creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youcrushtheeggshellsasyoucastthisspell, indicatingyourcomradesintheparty.Now, regardlessofwheretheymightendup,you will able to communicate with them. This spell functions like Rary’s telepathic bond (PH 268), except that the communication functions both on the same plane and across planes. Material Component: Pieces of eggshell from two different kinds of creatures.  INVISIBILITY, SUPERIOR  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal or touch Target: You or a creature or object weighing no more than 100 lb./ level  Asyoucompletethespell,yoursensesdull somewhat.Uponreleasingthespell’senergy on your desired subject, your senses clear, although the spell’s recipient can no longer be perceived. This powerful glamer functions like invisibility (PH 245), except that it masks image, scent, and sound alike, concealing the subject from all senses except touch. As with greater invisibility, this spell doesn’t end if the subject attacks. While invisible, the subject exudes no scent and is undetectable by scent, blindsense, tremorsense, and blindsight. Superior invisibility renders the recipient immune to detection by see invisibility,faerieﬁre,glitterdust,invisibilitypurge,anddustofappearance,although creatures under the effect of the spell can be detected by true seeing. Certain mundane conditions (such as leaving footprints) can also render a subject detectable.  INVISIBILITY, SWIFT Illusion (Glamer) Level: Assassin 2, bard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  Withawhisperedsyllableyoucompletethe spell. You notice that others look past you as if you weren’t there. This spell functions like invisibility (PH 245), except as noted above.  IRON BONES  Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 A brief ﬂash engulfs your undead ally, and throughitsﬂeshyoucanseeitsskeleton.The skeleton glows a dusky red for a moment. This spell functions like stone bones (page 208), except that the subject creature’s skeleton changes to iron. The creature gains a +6 natural armor bonus to AC.  Arcane Focus: A miniature skull made out of iron or steel.  IRON SILENCE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 2, bard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One suit of armor touched/ 3 levels Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object)  CHAPTER 1  INTERPLANAR TELEPATHIC BOND  Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  no idea what the message is). At any time afterward, you can send your interplanar message to that creature. The message pops into the target’s mind, awake or asleep, and the target is aware that the message has been delivered. If the message arrives when the target is asleep, it might appear as a vivid dream that the target remembers upon awakening. This spell does not obligate nor force the creature you communicate with to act. The target cannot reply to tell you its plans or intentions. The message travels through the Astral Plane to reach its target, so the spell cannot reach planes separate from (not coterminous to or coexistent with) the Astral Plane. You can have only one interplanar message active at any given time.  As you imitate a clanking noise you brush your hand over the armor you wish to silence. The armor glows softly orange for a moment before the glow fades. A closer look reveals what looks like orange grease in the joints of the armor. While this spell is in effect, the armor check penalty from the affected suit or suits of armor does not apply on Hide and Move Silently checks. Only wearers proﬁcient in the armor’s use get this beneﬁt when wearing the affected armor. The armor check penalty still applies to other skill checks as normal.  IRONGUARD  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F, M This spell functions like lesser ironguard, except that the subject you touch is immune to magic metal as well. Material Component: A tiny shield of wood, glass, or crystal. Focus: A small nugget of adamantine worth 100 gp.  IRONGUARD, LESSER  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  125  Illus. by L. Parillo  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  With few words and a gesture, a necromancer gives his skeletal allies bones of iron  Youwatchasyourtarget’sskinlightensand takes on a translucent look. The subject of lesser ironguard becomes immune to nonmagical metal. Metal items (including metal weapons) simply pass through you, and you can walk through metal barriers such as iron bars. Magic metal affects you normally, as do spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural effects. Attacks delivered by metal items (such as poison on a dagger) affect you normally. If the spell expires while metal is inside you, the metal object is shunted out of your body (or you away from the metal, if it is an immovable object such as a set of iron bars). You and the object each take 1d6 points of damage as a result (ignoring the object’s hardness for determining damage to it). Because you pass through metal, you can ignore armor bonuses from nonmagic metal armor on opponents you attack with unarmed attacks. Material Component: A tiny shield of wood, glass, or crystal.  126  IRONGUTS  Abjuration Level: Bard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You mutter the spell and uncork a bottle with a noxious concoction of scorpion venom, toad sweat, adder venom, and the strained brains of carrion crawlers. The poisonous liquid evaporates into a black cloud that surrounds your hand as you reach out to touch the target. You enable a creature to better ﬁght off the effect of poison. The subject is ﬁlled with antitoxin and gains a +5 alchemical bonus on Fortitude saves against all kinds of poisons, whether injury, contact, ingestion, or inhalation. After the spell ends, the subject is nauseated for 1 round.  Material Component: A vial containing the diluted poison of four different creatures.  IRONTHUNDER HORN Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  The last words of your spell boom out with athunderingroar,knockingthefoesinyour path off their feet. You create a deep resonant vibration that can shake creatures off their feet. Creatures in the area must succeed on a Reﬂex saving throw or fall prone.  JAGGED TOOTH  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 2 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One natural slashing or piercing weapon of target creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  JAWS OF THE WOLF  JOYFUL NOISE  Abjuration Level: Bard 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you  The junglerazer spell turns forest to ash and ruins plant creatures  You create sonic vibrations that negate any magical silence effect in the area. This zone of negation moves with you and lasts as long as you continue to concentrate. The silence effect is not dispelled but simply held in abeyance; it remains in effect outside the area of the joyful noise effect.  JUNGLERAZER  Necromancy Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by C. Dien  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One or more created worgs Duration: 1 round/level (D)  You turn small wooden carvings into a number of worgs (MM 256) equal to one for every two caster levels. These worgs appear between you and your opponents. They act on their own but obey your mental commands. If the worgs move beyond the range of the spell, or at the end of the spell, the worgs become carvings again. Killing a worg destroys its focus item. Focus: One carving of a worg for each that you create (25 gp each).  Youstompyourfootontheground,creating a ripple of noise that unleashes suppressed sounds behind it.  CHAPTER 1  This spell doubles the critical threat range of one natural weapon that deals either slashing or piercing damage. Multiple effects that increase a weapon’s threat range don’t stack.  You cast small wooden statuettes on the ground and they immediately grow into adult worgs. The worgs growl at your foes, their jaws slathered with spittle.  Duration: Concentration; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You feel your own teeth sharpen momentarily as you complete this spell. As the magical energy surrounds your intended target, it ﬂexes its muscles in appreciation of its weapon’s deadlier capabilities.  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  127  Illus. by J. Thomas  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Invisibledestructiveenergyspringssilently forth from you, instantly destroying all natural plant life in the area and leaving a path of ash in its wake. Fey, vermin, plants and plant creatures, and animals caught in the area take 1d10 points of negative energy damage per caster level (maximum 10d10). Material Component: A pinch of ash from a burnt plant.  JUNGLE’S RAPTURE  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living nonplant creature Duration: Permanent (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Spitting, you curse the creature, knowing that in days it will be either dead or just another weed. As you watch, its body becomesmorerigid,andtheﬁrstwhorlsof wood grain can be seen on its skin. The creature targeted by this spell immediately takes 1d6 points of Dexterity drain. This drain manifests as a hardening of the limbs and skin as the victim’s ﬂesh slowly turns to wood. Each day that passes, the victim takes an additional 1d6 points of Dexterity drain. Even if drained points are restored (through restoration, for example), the target creature still takes Dexterity drain each day until the spell is lifted. Once a victim of jungle’s rapture is drained to 0 Dexterity, it immediately transforms into a normal plant of the same size as its original body. Aside from radiating an aura of transmutation magic, the plant is a normal plant with no Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma scores. Jungle’s rapture is a curse, and as such it cannot be dispelled. It can be removed with a break enchantment, limited wish, miracle, or wish spell. Remove curse works only if the caster level of that spell is equal to or higher than your caster level at the time you cast jungle’s rapture.  KELPSTRAND  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 2  128  The kelpstrand spell entangles and grapples its target  Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You stretch out your hand and long strands of wet kelp streak out to envelop your foes. Make a ranged touch attack at each target. If you hit a creature, you immediately make an opposed grapple check against the creature as a free action without provoking attacks of opportunity. You add your caster level and your Wisdom bonus to the result of your grapple check rather than your Strength bonus and size bonus. If you succeed, the target becomes entangled in the thick strands of kelp and is grappled. Each round, the target can attempt to escape the kelpstrand by making a successful grapple or Escape Artist check against the kelpstrand’s grapple check. You are not considered grappling yourself while using this spell. Once you shoot your strands of kelp, you need not take any action to maintain the effect. A creature targeted with multiple kelpstrands has to make separate grapple or Escape Artist checks against each kelpstrand currently grappling it to escape. If you cast this spell while  you are within 300 feet of the ocean shore, you gain a +4 bonus on any grapple checks made to determine the outcome of a kelpstrand grapple. Material Component: A piece of dried seaweed.  KISS OF THE VAMPIRE Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  Drawing upon the powers of unlife, you give yourself abilities similar to those of a vampire. You become gaunt and pale with feral, red eyes. You gain damage reduction 10/magic, and you can use any one of the following abilities each round as a standard action. • enervation, as a melee touch attack • vampiric touch, as a melee touch attack • charm person • gaseous form (self only) While you are using this spell, inﬂict spells heal you and cure spells hurt you. You are treated as if you were undead for the purpose of all spells and effects. A successful turn (or rebuke) attempt against an undead of your Hit Dice  Transmutation (Teleportation) Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 5 ft./2 levels; see text Target: You Duration: Instantaneous The ground before you appears overlaid with a chessboard pattern, with certain squares of the chessboard glowing softly red.Timestopsforyouasyoumovewithout walking to the indicated location. You can teleport with a limited distance and a circumspect form of movement. You can instantly move up to 5 feet per two caster levels with this spell, but you must end this movement in a square that leaves you ﬂanking an enemy.  KNOW GREATEST ENEMY  Divination Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Your eyes ﬂash green, turning golden as yoursurveyyouropponents.Toyoureyes, the weakest of them are limned with a pale greennimbus,whichintensiﬁeswithpower. Themostpowerfuliswrappedinabrilliant, shimmering green aura.  CR 4 or lower 5–10 11–15 16 or higher  Strength Weak Moderate Strong Overwhelming  Among creatures within the same category, you know which is the most powerful, but not why. For example, among a group of ogres (CR 2), you would know one of them (an ogre with two levels of barbarian, CR 4) was the most powerful, but not know if it was because the ogre had class levels, a template (such as half-ﬁendish), or for another reason. Any spell of 3rd level or higher that prevents scrying attempts on a creature (such as nondetection) or an area (such as false vision) thwarts this spell’s ability to evaluate that creature or creatures within that area.  KNOW OPPONENT  Divination Level: Bard 3, cleric 3 Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youfeelyoureyesglowwithmagicalenergy asyoucompletethespell.Youseeluminous words appear in the air above your spell’s target. The words describe the creature’s strengths or weaknesses, as you desire. You gauge the strengths and weaknesses of an opponent to gain combat advantages. Upon casting this spell, you learn a number of strengths or weaknesses of the target equal to one, plus one strength or weakness per two caster levels (maximum four). You can choose to learn strengths, weaknesses, or some combination thereof that you specify. If a creature has more strengths or weaknesses than you can learn with a single casting, you learn the most powerful ones ﬁrst. Thus, if a monster can use ﬁnger of death at will and has resistance to sonic 5, you would learn about ﬁnger of death ﬁrst.  Strengths can include attack forms and special abilities (including spelllike abilities or supernatural abilities). Weaknesses include vulnerability to an energy type. For example, suppose a 7th-level cleric casts know opponent on a blackarmored warrior, choosing to learn one strength and two weaknesses. The warrior fails his save, and the DM informs the cleric’s player that the opponent has the ability to drain energy (a strength), is adversely affected by sunlight, and can be repelled by a holy symbol (both weaknesses). The cleric then concludes that he faces a vampire and breaks out the wooden stakes.  CHAPTER 1  KNIGHT’S MOVE  This spell evaluates the creatures in the area and determines the relative power level of each. Creatures are evaluated as follows.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  requires you to make a Will saving throw (DC 10 + turning character’s Cha modiﬁer) or be panicked (or cowering) for 10 rounds. A turn attempt that would destroy (or command) undead of your Hit Dice requires you to make a Will save (DC 15 + turning character’s Cha modiﬁer) or be stunned (or charmed as by charm monster) for 10 rounds. Any charm effect you create with this spell ends when the spell ends, but all other effects remain until their normal duration expires. Material Component: A black onyx worth at least 50 gp that has been carved with the image of a fangmouthed face.  KNOW VULNERABILITIES  Divination Level: Bard 2, cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your eyes turn red, then take on a golden hue. As you look at the creature, you see small runes dancing around its head. Each rune identiﬁes a particular vulnerability orresistance—redforresistances,greenfor vulnerabilities. You learn any special qualities, vulnerabilities, and resistances the target creature has. Vulnerabilities include anything that causes the creature more than the normal amount of damage (such as a creature with the cold subtype having vulnerability to ﬁre or a crystalline creature’s susceptibility to the shatter spell). Resistances include any effects that reduce or negate damage the creature takes and immunities to particular attacks. The spell identiﬁes resistances and vulnerabilities granted by spell effects. For example, if cast upon a balor, you learn that it has damage reduction 15/cold iron and good; spell resistance 28; immunity to poison, ﬁre, and electricity; resistance to acid 10 and cold 10; and that it does not have any particular vulnerabilities.  129  Illus. by M. Phillippi  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  LAND WOMB  Abjuration Level: Druid 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: You and one other creature/ level Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Others watch you speak the spell, and the earth opens up and swallows you whole. You remain safe and secure beneath the ground, untouched by events above. You cannot enter a land womb through stone or rock, only through tillable soil. The land womb holds you secure 10 feet below the surface. Anyone in a land womb cannot be perceived by divination spells of 4th level or less. You can bring one additional creature per caster level with you into the land womb. All creatures to be brought into the land womb must be touching each other (for instance, holding hands in a ring). Land womb creates an underground space large enough to hold all target creatures. While space is tight, spellcasting by targets is still possible while in the conﬁnes of the spell’s effect. You can no longer hear or see anything on the surface by nonmagical means. You can end the spell at will, but those who are with you cannot. At the end of the spell’s duration, all within the land womb return to the spot where they stood before the spell took effect.  LANGUOR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes  130  Withalowthrummingsound,abluebeam lances from your ﬁnger to strike your foe and weaken him.  Rushing to the body of your fallen ally, you call out magic words that will bring back life and breath to your friend.  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. This ray causes creatures it hits to become weak and slow for the spell’s duration. A struck creature takes a penalty to Strength equal to 1d6+1 per two caster levels (maximum 1d6+10). In addition, a subject that fails a Will save is slowed. The spell’s slow effect counters and is countered by haste.  Last breath restores life to a recently deceased creature, creating a new body for the returning spirit to inhabit. However, the spell must be cast within 1 round of the victim’s death. This spell functions like reincarnate (PH 270), except that the reincarnated creature receives no level loss, no Constitution loss, and no loss of spells. The creature has –1 hit points (but is stable). Material Component: Rare oils and unguents worth a total of at least 500 gp, spread over the remains.  LAUNCH BOLT  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One crossbow bolt in your possession Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The crossbow bolt in your hand glows a bright red, then ﬂies off at your foe.  Lawful sword gives a paladin the upper hand over chaotic foes  LAST BREATH  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Dead creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You cast this spell on a crossbow bolt, causing it to ﬂy at a target of your choice as if you had ﬁred it from a light crossbow, using a ranged attack roll. The bolt has a range increment of 80 feet. Any properties of the crossbow bolt (such as magical abilities, masterwork quality, and so on) or feats you possess (such as Point Blank Shot, Weapon Focus [light crossbow], and so on) apply. Drawing a bolt for this spell is a free action. Material Component: The crossbow bolt to be ﬁred (1 sp).  LAUNCH ITEM  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One Fine item in your possession, weighing up to 10 lb.  You hold the item and windmill your arm in an underhanded toss. When it leaves your hand, it is bathed in an orange glow and ﬂies farther than you could throw any item.  You instantly gain an overview of the area around you. Lay of the land gives basic information relevant to major landmarks, such as rivers, lakes, and settlements (of at least hamlet size). It indicates the direction and distance to each from the current location. You have a good understanding of the terrain up to 50 miles from your current location. Unlike ﬁnd the path, this spell does not give information on traps, passwords, or impediments to a journey. Arcane Focus: A small piece of lodestone.  You cause a Fine item in your possession to ﬂy at great speed to a target or location you specify, out to medium range (100 ft. + 10 ft./level). This spell is normally used to launch dangerous items (ﬂasks of acid, thunderstones, and so on) farther than you could normally throw them. You can use this spell to make an attack with a splash weapon. If you choose to do so, you must make an attack roll as normal, but you suffer no penalties for range.  LAWFUL SWORD  Evocation Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Callingtomindthoughtsofjustice,yourun your ﬁngers along the weapon, imbuing it with power. This spell functions like holy sword (PH 242), except as follows. The weapon functions as a +5 axiomatic weapon (+5 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls, lawful-aligned, deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against chaotic opponents). It also emits a magic circle against chaos effect (as the spell).  LAY OF THE LAND  Divination Level: Bard 4, druid 4, ranger 1 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 3 rounds Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Youcastthisspellandaresurroundedwith a nimbus of green light. In your mind, a mapunfoldsofthesurroundingarea,show-  LEGION’S (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name formerly began with legion’s has been renamed to a mass spell, and is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name.  LESSER (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with lesser is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a lesser spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  LIFE BOLT  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Up to ﬁve rays Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Holdingyourpalmoutward,youintonethe spell and empower it with a bit of your own life. A golden ray beams forth from your hand, striking an undead creature where its heart should have been. You draw forth some of your own life force to create a beam of positive energy that harms undead. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to  strike a target. You must make a ranged touch attack to hit, and if the ray hits an undead creature, it deals 1d12 points of damage. Creating each beam deals you 1 point of nonlethal damage. For every two caster levels beyond 1st, you can create an additional ray, up to a maximum of ﬁve rays at 9th level. If you shoot multiple rays, you can have them strike a single creature or several creatures. You must designate targets before you check for spell resistance or roll damage. All rays must be aimed at enemies that are all within 30 feet of each other.  LIFE WARD  CHAPTER 1  ing the cities, hamlets, and known ruins as ifpennedbyacartographer.Thelightfades but the knowledge of the map remains.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Abjuration Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes With a brush of your hand you surround the creature in crawling shadows, a cloak of negative energy that whirls and swims across the creature’s body. A creature warded by this spell gains protection from the effects of positive energy, including magical healing. The spell can be cast upon undead to offer additional protection against the turning abilities of clerics. The subject is immune to all positive energy effects, including conjuration (healing) spells, channeled positive energy such as from the turn undead ability, or other effects that derive their power from positive energy. This spell offers protection from the blinding effect of the Positive Energy Plane, and warded creatures gain no temporary hit points while there.  LIFE’S GRACE  Abjuration Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  131  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You say a brief prayer and touch your holy symbol to a creature. Symbols of warding and safety appear and ﬂow out to cover the creature in a web of protective magic beforefadingfromsight,absorbedintothe creature’s form. The living creature touched becomes immune to all death spells, magical death effects, energy drain, and any negative energy effects. In addition, the subject is immune to undead special attacks that deal ability damage, ability drain, and magical disease (such as mummy rot), even if these attacks do not have a magical source. (For example, the spell prevents poison damage from the poisonous bite of an undead creature.) This spell does not prevent such attacks from undead originating from spells, magic items, or class abilities; only the special attacks from the undead’s base nature are affected. In addition, the subject’s armor or clothing is considered ghost touch armor, and its armor bonus counts against incorporeal attacks. (A suit of clothing is considered armor that gives +0 AC for this purpose, though it can be enhanced with spells such as magic vestment.) This spell doesn’t remove negative levels that the subject has already gained, nor does it affect the saving throw necessary 24 hours after gaining a negative level.  LIGHT OF LUNIA  Evocation [Good, Light] Level: Celestia 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target and Effect: You and up to two rays; see text Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) or until discharged; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text You invoke the powers of good and you begin to glow with the silver light of fabled Lunia,theﬁrstlayeroftheSevenMounting Heavens of Celestia.  132  The silvery radiance created by this spell emanates from you in a 30-foot radius, and dim light extends for an additional 30 feet.  Beginning one turn after you cast this spell, you can choose to expend some or all of the light of Lunia as a ray of light. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. You can make a single ranged touch attack that deals 1d6 points of damage, or 2d6 points of damage against undead or evil outsiders, with a range of 30 feet. Spell resistance applies to this attack. This dims your silvery radiance to half (15-foot light, with dim light for an additional 15 feet). You can choose to ﬁre one additional ray with the same characteristics either on the same round or on a subsequent round. Firing the second ray quenches your radiance and ends the spell.  LIGHT OF MERCURIA  Evocation [Good, Light] Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 This spell functions like light of Lunia, except that the radiance created is golden. Your light rays deal 2d6 points of damage, or 4d6 points of damage against undead and evil outsiders.  LIGHT OF VENYA  Evocation [Good, Light] Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 This spell functions like light of Lunia, except that a softy pearly radiance is created. Your light rays deal 3d6 points of damage, or 6d6 points of damage against undead and evil outsiders. Alternatively, you can choose for the ray to heal 1d6 points of damage + your divine spellcaster level (maximum 1d6+10) to a living, non-evil creature.  LIGHTFOOT  Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, ranger 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round Youmutterthewordsofthisshortspelland dive down the hallway, dancing between the armed guards and out the gate. You provoke no attacks of opportunity when moving.  LIGHTNING RING Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Effect: Ring of electricity Duration: 1 round/2 levels Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Your body quakes as a ring of crackling electricityexplodesfromyourchesttowhirl about you. The ring of electricity moves with you and does not interfere with your spellcasting or attacks, or with others attacking you. As long as the lightning ring is in effect, you gain resistance to electricity 20. At the beginning of your turn each round, adjacent creatures take 10d6 points of electricity damage, or half that with a successful Reﬂex save. In addition, each round as a free action at the beginning of your turn, you can direct two lightning bolts that deal 5d6 points of electricity damage each, exactly as the lightning bolt spell (caster level 5th), in any directions you choose. Each bolt can be aimed separately. A creature struck by one of these bolts can make a Reﬂex save for half damage. The DC for this save is calculated for an 8th-level spell, even though the bolts mimic a 3rd-level spell. Material Components: A small glass ring and a bit of fur from any animal.  LIONHEART  Abjuration [Mind-Affecting] Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youtouchyourallywhileintoningthespell. Where your ﬁnger touches, a warm glow appears, then fades. The subject gains immunity to fear effects.  Material Component: A hair from a lion’s mane.  LION’S CHARGE  or sack, the DC of the Listen check increases by 5. The coins continue to function no matter how far apart they are, although they fall silent if they’re on different planes. Focus: The pair of coins.  LISTENING LORECALL  This spell grants you the pounce special ability (MM 313), allowing you to make a full attack at the end of a charge.  You feel conscious of your ears as they warm noticeably. Sounds that seem as though they should be mufﬂed become clear to you.  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Cleric 8, Courage 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous or 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial or Will negates (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes or Yes (harmless); see text  LIVELY STEP  You open your mouth and emit a tremendous roar, a sound like a lion but as loud as a mountain falling. All enemies within the spell’s area take 1d8 points of sonic damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d8) and are stunned for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save halves the damage and negates the stunning effect. In addition, all allies within the spell’s area gain a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls and saves against fear effects, plus temporary hit points equal to 1d8 + caster level (to a maximum of 1d8+20 temporary hit points at caster level 20th).  LISTENING COIN Divination (Scrying) Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S, F  A wizard uses the lightning ring spell to shock her foes  Rubbing two coins together with your ﬁngers, you whisper arcane words into them. Holding one to your ear surreptitiously, you hand over the other. You turn two ordinary coins into magic listening devices—one a sensor and the other a receiver. After casting the spell, you simply give the sensor coin away, either surreptitiously or overtly. By holding the receiver coin up to your ear, you can hear whatever transpires near the sensor as if you were there (much like a clairaudience effect). If the sensor coin is in a pocket, pouch,  Illus. by W. England  You gain a +4 insight bonus on Listen checks. In addition, if you have 5 or more ranks in Listen, you gain blindsense out to 30 feet. If you have 12 or more ranks in Listen, you gain blindsight out to 15 feet. A silence spell or effect negates the blindsense or blindsight granted by a listening lorecall spell.  LION’S ROAR  CHAPTER 1  You cast the spell and a nimbus of yellow energy in the form of a lion surrounds you.  Divination Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Effect: Magical sensor Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: Up to 12 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Beating a small drum and singing a marching tune, you exhort your allies to struggle on. Once you cast this spell, the speed of you and all allies within 30 feet of you increases by 10 feet. You and other affected creatures can only beneﬁt from this spell by refraining from taking any actions other than move actions. When one of the affected creatures takes any other kind of action, this spell ends. Focus: A small drum.  133  LIVING PRINTS  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Divination Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level You eyes glow green and you can now see the trails laid down almost a month ago, as clearly as if your quarry had just passed through. You perceive tracks as if they had just been made. You must notice the prints normally with a successful Search or Survival check, but this eliminates any penalties to your tracking due to the passage of time or any rainfall since the making of the trail. This spell has no effect on tracks more than thirty days old.  LIVING UNDEATH  Necromancy Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You invoke the will of your gods and your skin sags and becomes sallow, your eyes hollow, and your ﬂesh foul and rotted. This spell imparts a physical transformation upon the subject, not unlike the process that produces a zombie. While the subject does not actually become undead, its vital processes are temporarily bypassed with no seeming ill effect. The subject is not subject to sneak attacks and critical hits for the duration of the spell, as if it were undead. While the spell is in effect, the subject takes a –4 penalty to its Charisma score (to a minimum of 1).  LOVE’S LAMENT  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3  134  Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Dirgelike music ﬁlls the area, reminding those in range of lost loves and life’s disappointments. Creatures within the area of this spell that fail their saves take 1d6 points of Wisdom damage and are nauseated for 1d4 rounds.  LOW-LIGHT VISION  Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You pass your hand over the subject’s eyes and murmur the arcane words. Its eyes grow larger, and when it opens them, the pupils are speckled with tiny silvers of starlight. The subject creature gains low-light vision. Arcane Material Component: A small candle.  LOYAL VASSAL  Abjuration [Lawful] Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One willing creature touched/3 levels Duration: 10 minutes/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Upon invoking the divine words, glowing silverrunesencircleyourallies’heads.The runes quickly fade, but the resolve they instilled remain.  You protect the subjects against mindaffecting spells and abilities, giving them a +3 sacred bonus on saving throws against such effects. The spell also helps prevent them from being magically compelled to harm you or anyone else affected by this spell. Any attempt to make a loyal vassal do so (whether the originating effect occurred before or after this spell was cast) counts as a suicidal order, triggering appropriate responses and possibly ending the controlling spell. If the subjects willingly attempt to harm you, the spell is broken for them immediately.  LUCENT LANCE  Transmutation [Light] Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text The eternal energies of light and darkness you call upon to cast this spell cause the ambient light near you to coalesce around the crystal rod in your hand. The light erupts in a coruscating beam of radiance shaped like a needle-sharp lance. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck is blinded for 1 round, and dazzled for 1 round per caster level. A creature sensitive to bright light (such as a drow, duergar, or kuo-toa) takes penalties as if it had been exposed to full daylight for 1 round if struck by the beam, even if it resists the spell’s other effects. In addition to this dazzling effect, lucent lance deals damage based on the level of light available within your square. In bright light, it deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6). In shadowy illumination, it deals 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d4). If no light is present in your square, the spell cannot be cast at all. Focus: A clear glass or crystal rod.  LUMINOUS GAZE  Evocation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  You can choose to inﬂict one of the following conditions upon any creatures that fail their saving throws.  Withanincomprehensibleword and the touch of a hand wrapped in black magic, you reduce your foe to a screaming lunatic.  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8  Lucent lance bores a hole through a shadow  Hysteria: The subjects fall into ﬁts of uncontrollable laughing or crying (equal chance for either). This hysteria affects subjects as though they were nauseated; they are unable to attack, cast spells, concentrate on spells, or do anything else requiring attention. The only action a subject can take is a single move action per turn. Panic: The subjects become panicked. If cornered, a panicked creature cowers.  Maelstrom causes a deadly vortex to form in water. A body of water in which you form the maelstrom must be at least 120 feet wide and 60 feet deep, or the spell is wasted. Waterborne creatures or objects within 50 feet of the vortex (below and on all sides) must make successful Reﬂex saves or be sucked in. Trained swimmers can attempt Swim checks instead if their skill modiﬁer is higher than their Reﬂex save bonus. Waterborne vessels avoid being sucked in if their operators make Profession (sailor) checks against the same DC as the spell’s saving throw. These creatures and objects take 3d8 points of damage upon being sucked in. Once inside, creatures and objects take 3d8 points of bludgeoning damage each round at the beginning of your turn. They remain trapped for 2d4 rounds, after which time they are ejected to any square adjacent to the bottom of the vortex (your choice). Ejected subjects might be sucked back into the vortex, but they receive a new Reﬂex save. Subjects of Large or smaller size are ejected from the bottom of the  Illus. by J. Engle  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Madness 8 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1d4+1 rounds Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  MADDENING WHISPERS  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 8, Ocean 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: A whirlpool 120 ft. wide and 60 ft. deep Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No Whirling about your hand and pulling itdown,yourmagicreachesoutanddoes the same to the water but on a titanic scale, creating a vortex of sucking waves.  MADDENING SCREAM  This spell makes it impossible for the victim to do anything other than race about caterwauling. The creature must move its speed each turn, unless somehow prevented, and can take no other action. The spell gives the subject a –4 penalty to Armor Class, its Reﬂex saving throws fail except on a roll of 20, and the subject cannot use a shield.  MAELSTROM  CHAPTER 1  This spell causes your eyes to glow with an unearthly radiance. The glow from your eyes provides light as per the light spell. Each creature within a 20-foot radius of you is dazzled as long as they remain with range. Sightless creatures are unaffected.  Asyoumutterthisspell,yourwordsburrow intoyourfoes’mindslikehungrymaggots, spawning dark and disturbing thoughts.  Violent Hallucinations: The subjects perceive any nearby creatures as dangerous enemies, attacking the nearest ones and ﬁghting until the subjects are slain or until no more creatures are in sight. Stupor: The subjects curl up on the ﬂoor and remain oblivious to events around them. Characters in a stupor are effectively stunned and prone. SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  At the corners of your vision you see a brightly glowing light. Wherever you look, that area ﬁlls with light as bright as a torch.  Components: V Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  135  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  An aquatic druid can wreak havoc with the maelstrom spell, all the while unseen by his foes  vortex. Larger subjects are ejected from the top.  MAGE ARMOR, GREATER  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S An invisible sheen of armor-shaped force surrounds you. This spell functions like mage armor (PH 249), except that it requires no material component and its tangible ﬁeld of force provides a +6 armor bonus to Armor Class.  MAGE ARMOR, MASS  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  136  You feel arcane energy encompass you, granting you a sense of serenity. As you chooseyourtargetsforthespell,youseeeach one glow brieﬂy with a silver aura. This spell functions like mage armor (PH 249), except that it affects multiple creatures.  MAGE HAND, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One object or creature weighing up to 40 lb. Duration: Concentration Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youcastthespell,andyourhandissuffused with a ghostly white radiance. You point your ﬁnger at the target across the room, and it slowly rises in the air.  A greater mage hand spell can lift an object and move it at will from a distance. As a move action, you can propel the target up to 20 feet in any direction, although the spell ends if the distance between you and the subject ever exceeds the spell’s range. A creature can negate the effect against an object it possesses with a successful Will save or if you fail to overcome its spell resistance. An object can be telekinetically manipulated as if with one hand. For example, a lever or rope can be pulled, a key can be turned, an object rotated, and so on, if the force required is within the weight limitation. The spell has an effective Strength of 10.  MAGIC FANG, SUPERIOR  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal  Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youspeaktheoldwordsoftheincantation, and your hands glow with a yellow aura that ﬂashes at the tips of your digits.  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No A thick, sparkling cloud of billowing mist rolls into being from the point you indicate. This potent spell conjures a cloud of mist that functions as a solid fog spell (PH 281). In addition, any spells cast within the fog have a –4 penalty to the spellcaster’s caster level, and the save DC of any such spell is reduced by 2. Creatures within the fog, or that enter the fog, must succeed on a Will save or suffer the reduction in caster level and DC even after they leave the fog, for the duration of the spell. Material Component: A small piece of quilted cloth, which must be soaked in water while the spell is cast.  MALEVOLENT MIASMA Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 15-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No  You click the stones together in your hand and a gray fog, tinged with darker, malevolentstreaks,springsupinthemidst of your enemies.  Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You cast a spell that reaches into another plane and pulls another creature to your realm. You can cause one creature on a coexistent plane (DMG 150), along with its personal belongings, to suddenly appear on your plane of existence. An affected creature appears in the location analogous to the space it occupied on the coexistent plane. For example, the make manifest spell allows you to cause a target on the Ethereal Plane to appear on the Material Plane, and vice versa. This spell does not grant the ability to pinpoint the location of ethereal creatures. For the duration of the spell, the target creature retains all its abilities except for those that allow it to enter other planes. For example, a ghost brought in from the Ethereal Plane would be unable to return to the Ethereal Plane but would remain incorporeal. At the end of the spell’s duration, the target creature returns to whatever plane it was on before it was targeted by the spell, even if it has moved beyond the range of make manifest.  MAKE MANIFEST, MASS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Area: 25-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Saving Throw: None  This spell functions like make manifest, except that all creatures and unattended objects on coterminous and coexistent planes within the area of this spell are instantly brought onto your plane. For the duration of the spell, the target creatures retain all their abilities except for those that allow them to enter other planes. At the end of mass make manifest’s duration, objects and creatures return to their plane of origin, even if they have left the spell’s area. Material Component: A handful of copper dust.  CHAPTER 1  MAGIC MIASMA  MAKE MANIFEST  You toss a handful of copper dust into the air, and it clings to creatures invisible to you. Suddenly they’re visible and in your presence.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Superior magic fang gives every natural weapon you possess an enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls equal to +1 per four caster levels (maximum +5 at 20th level).  The spell produces a toxic fog that deals 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per level (maximum 5d4). Creatures in the area that hold their breath are still subject to the effect. Creatures that are immune to poison are not affected by this spell. Focus: Three polished gray stones.  MANTLE OF CHAOS  Abjuration [Chaos] Level: Cleric 3, Limbo 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You invoke the powers of chaos, and a ﬂickering yellow ﬁeld of anarchic energy surrounds you. The power of this spell grants you spell resistance equal to 12 + your caster level against spells with the lawful descriptor.  MANTLE OF EVIL  Abjuration [Evil] Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, Hades 3 You invoke the powers of evil, and a dark, wavering ﬁeld of unholy energy wraps around you like a cloak. This spell functions like mantle of chaos, except that mantle of evil grants spell resistance against spells with the good descriptor.  MANTLE OF GOOD  Abjuration [Good] Level: Cleric 3, Elysium 3, paladin 3  137  You invoke the powers of good, and a shimmering white ﬁeld of holy energy swaddles you.  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  This spell functions like mantle of chaos, except that mantle of good grants spell resistance against spells with the evil descriptor.  MANTLE OF THE ICY SOUL  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Cleric 6, druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One pair of disembodied, ﬂying jaws per caster level (maximum ten pairs) Duration: Concentration, up to 3 rounds Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes You clamp your teeth together with the lastgesture,andseveraldisembodiedjaws of blue force appear and ﬂoat toward your foes, gnashing their teeth.  The subject creature gains the cold subtype, granting it immunity to cold and vulnerability to ﬁre (the creature takes half again as much damage from ﬁre effects). A ﬁre creature subjected to this spell does not gain the cold subtype, but it loses the ﬁre subtype for the duration. Material Component: A pinch of sapphire dust worth 10 gp.  MANTLE OF LAW  You invoke the powers of law, and a constant blue ﬁeld of axiomatic energy surrounds you. This spell functions like mantle of chaos, except that mantle of law grants spell resistance against spells with the chaotic descriptor.  MANYJAWS  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  138  MARK OF THE HUNTER  Divination Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature, which must be a favored enemy Du ration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes By pointing your ﬁnger at oneofyourfavoredenemies, you mark it with a glowing rune that only you can see.  As you touch the creature, a chill sweeps through you and down yourarm.Asthespelltakeseffect, the creature’s body changes hue, becoming an icy blue.  Abjuration [Law] Level: Cleric 3, Mechanus 3, paladin 3  amount with a successful Reﬂex save. A creature targeted by multiple pairs of jaws in a single round makes only one saving throw, with success halving the total damage. Material Component: A pair of teeth.  Manyjaws gives wizards a potent offense they can use while taking other actions  When you cast this spell, you summon several pairs of mystical, disembodied jaws that ﬂy about and attack your foes. These pairs of jaws can be commanded to attack separate targets, or multiple pairs can be sent to attack a single foe. The jaws originate at your location and ﬂy out to attack their targets, moving at a ﬂy speed of 40 feet with perfect maneuverability. You can redirect as many of the jaws as you desire as a standard action. Each round on your action, each pair of jaws automatically hits its target and deals 1d6 points of damage, or half that  Your favored enemy bonuses against a foe with a mark of the hunter are 4 higher than they would otherwise be. Furthermore, the rune limns your enemy, making the foe easier for you to attack. The subject of a mark of the hunter spell gains no bonus to Armor Class against your attacks from any cover less than total cover, nor does it gain a miss chance against your attacks from any concealment less than total concealment. Other effects that grant a miss chance (such as incorporeality) work normally. Material Component: A bit of skin or bone from the relevant favored enemy type or subtype.  MARK OF THE OUTCAST  Necromancy Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 2, druid 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Youselectyourvictimforpunishmentand invoke the ancient words of anathema. A dull purple splotch in the shape of a skull manifests itself on your victim’s ﬂesh, visible to all.  Divination Level: Assassin 2, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 24 hours/level By holding the small item to your nose and reciting the ancient words of power you unleash the spell. You immediately have a sense of the object’s owner such that you believe you could ﬁnd further indications of the creature’s passage. Upon casting this spell, you become attuned to the speciﬁc creature that owns the spell’s focus item. (A creature is considered to own an item if it was the last creature to carry the item on its person for 24 hours or more. You do not count when considering what creature was last to carry an item.) This attunement grants you a +10 bonus on Search and Survival checks made to track the item’s owner or ﬁnd evidence of the owner’s passage. This spell does not give you insight into who or what the creature you are attuned to is or where that creature ultimately might be. Also, the spell does not provide a trail that is not already there nor provide you with the beneﬁt of the Track feat. Arcane Focus: An object owned by the creature or a piece of the creature to be tracked, such as a tuft of hair or a ﬁngernail.  MASTER AIR  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youholdafeatheraloftandintonethespell. Great translucent wings unfold from your back. You leap up and are airborne. You sprout a pair of insubstantial feathery or batlike (your choice) wings. You can ﬂy at a speed of 90 feet with good maneuverability (60 feet if you’re wearing medium or heavy armor). Using master air requires as much concentration as walking, so you can attack or cast spells normally. You can charge but not run, and you cannot carry aloft more weight than your maximum load (PH 161), plus any armor you wear. Should the spell duration expire while you are still aloft, the magic fails slowly. You drop 60 feet per round for 1d6 rounds. If you reach the ground in that amount of time, you land safely. If not, you fall the rest of the distance, taking falling damage normally. Since dispelling a spell effectively ends it, you also fall in this way if the master air spell is dispelled. Focus: A wing feather from any bird or the wing bone of any bat.  MASTER EARTH  Transmutation Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Thegroundbelowyourfeetsuddenlyseems insubstantial, and you sink below the sur-  You travel straight through the earth itself to a destination you choose. The movement is instantaneous and has no distance limitations (though the location must be on the same world). You need only think of where you want to go. If you don’t think of an exact location, the earth carries you to the periphery of the general area you imagine. The earth never leaves you stranded inside it. It always puts you back to the surface even if it cannot deliver you to your chosen destination. It takes you as far as it can. Underground, creaturebuilt structures don’t hinder you as long as you can move around them. This spell functions only on the Material Plane. Focus: The fossil of any animal.  CHAPTER 1  MARKED OBJECT  Any spell whose name begins with mass is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a mass spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  face,movingthroughdirtandstoneaseasily as if you were ﬂying through the air.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell creates an indelible mark on the subject’s face (or other upper body part, if the subject doesn’t have a head). The mark is visible to normal vision, low-light vision, and darkvision. The wearer of such a mark takes a –5 circumstance penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and a –2 penalty to Armor Class. The mark cannot be dispelled, but it can be removed with a break enchantment,limitedwish,miracle,removecurse, or wish spell.  MASS (SPELL NAME)  MASTER’S TOUCH  Divination Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, F Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Holding aloft an item you wish to use effectively, you address it directly with a command to obey your desire to wield it. You gain proﬁciency with a single weapon or shield you hold in your hands when the spell is cast. The lack of a somatic component means the spell can be cast in the middle of a ﬁght while you keep ready whatever items stand between you and danger. Proﬁciency is granted for only a single, speciﬁc item, although multiple castings allow for multiple proﬁciencies. For example, if you hold a short sword and a rapier, with a buckler strapped to your off hand, you could cast the spell three times, once for each weapon and once for the shield. This spell does not grant proﬁciency for a kind or category of item (such as short swords) but only for the one speciﬁc item held in your hand at the time the spell is cast (this short sword). Should you set that item down or otherwise lose your grip on it, the proﬁciency does not transfer to a dif-  139  ferent item of the same kind you might pick up. However, if you recover the original item before the spell’s effect runs out, you are still proﬁcient with that speciﬁc weapon or shield for the duration. Focus: The item in whose use you wish to be proﬁcient.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  MAW OF CHAOS  Abjuration [Chaotic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 15-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes At the culmination of casting the spell you open your mouth wide as if to yawn. In imitation,theaircracksandsplits,opening into a yawning area of roiling blue-green energy resembling a great mouth. All creatures in the area take 1d6 points of damage per caster level in the round when you cast the spell and each round thereafter at the start of your turn. Those damaged must also make a Will saving throw or be dazed for 1 round. Second, the chaotic energy makes it difﬁcult to concentrate. Any activity that involves concentration (such as casting a spell or using a spell-like ability) requires a Concentration check (DC 25 + spell level) to succeed. Creatures with the chaotic subtype are unaffected by this spell. Material Component: A jawbone with teeth.  MAW OF STONE  Transmutation Level: Cavern 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One cave mouth or natural tunnel up to 20 ft. in diameter Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No The rock comes alive, opening into a huge maw of deadly stone.  140  You cause a single natural opening or natural chamber to become animated. The opening or chamber cannot move, but it can attack. You can order it to attack any creature, or a speciﬁc type of creature. You also can order it to attack under a speciﬁc circumstance, such as when creatures try to leave or when they touch something. An animated opening can attack only creatures that try to move through it. An animated chamber can attack every creature inside. Only one maw of stone can be in effect on a particular opening or chamber at a time. The animated opening has an attack bonus equal to your level +10. The maw of stone deals damage equal to 2d8 points + your caster level. An animated opening can make one immediate attack against a creature passing through. If it succeeds, the target must make a Reﬂex save or it cannot pass through the maw. The animated stone has an Armor Class of 15 and hardness 8. Dealing 60 points of damage to it ends the spell.  MECHANUS MIND  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Lawful, Mind-Affecting] Level: Mechanus 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You speak the words of the spell and your mind feels clearer and more organized, as if it were mere drawers where everything wasputinitsproperplace.Yourfacegrows calmerandunexpressive,butyourthoughts are more rational and ordered. The subject gains a +4 resistance bonus on Will saving throws to resist mindaffecting spells and abilities. While in the grip of Mechanus mind, the subject also becomes more analytical and less emotional. The subject gains a +2 competence bonus on Intelligence-based checks, but takes a –2 penalty on Charisma-based checks.  MEMORY ROT  Evocation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes You blow across your open palm at your opponent, and your breath coalesces into a cloud of glowing yellow spores that surround your foe’s head, driving through its scalp into the brain beneath. You create a cloud of spores that infests the brain of the subject creature, gradually destroying its mind. The spores deal 1d6 points of Intelligence damage immediately. The spores then gradually eat away at the subject’s brain, dealing 1 point of Intelligence drain each round thereafter at the beginning of your turn. The subject can attempt a Fortitude save each round to combat the effect of the spores. A successful save ends the spores’ advance and halts any further Intelligence drain.  MESMERIZING GLARE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One living creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You say nothing, but your eyes glow with a warm, friendly ﬁre. Others stop to regard you, and once enraptured, they cannot look away. Directing your gaze toward the target creatures, you cause them to stop and stare blankly at you. Creatures that fail their saving throws become fascinated.  METAL MELT  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Nonmagical metal object weighing up to 5 lb./level Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  MIND POISON  Evocation Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 3 rounds/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You hiss out a red mist that streaks toward your target despite prevailing winds and claws into his mouth and nose, choking him. By ﬁlling the subject’s mouth and throat with unbreathable gas, you prevent it from doing much more than coughing and spitting. An affected creature cannot speak, cast spells with verbal components, use breath weapons, or utter command words to activate magic items, but it can otherwise act normally. The subject can hold its breath for 2 rounds per point of Constitution  Metal melt can cause a metal weapon to run like water  MIASMA OF ENTROPY  Necromancy Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area or Target: Cone-shaped burst or one solid object; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half or Will negates (object); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (object)  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Du ration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  MIASMA  Miasma of entropy causes accelerated decay in all wood, leather, and other natural materials in the spell’s area. It destroys nonmagical objects of wood, leather, paper, and other formerly living organic matter. All such objects within the area rot into slimy, pulpy masses. Objects weighing more than 1 pound per caster level are not affected, but all other objects of the appropriate composition are ruined. Alternatively, you can target miasma of entropy against a single solid object of nonliving nonmagical organic matter that weighs up to 10 pounds per caster level.  Illus. by D. Martin  You alter the physical properties of a metal object so that it runs like water. The melted metal does not change temperature but ﬂows as a liquid for 1 round and then returns to its normal solid state, usually in a form resembling a puddle. An item in a creature’s possession is allowed a Will save, using the creature’s saving throw bonus unless its own is higher. Material Component: A drop of mercury in a vial.  A red mist rises from the ground as you intone this spell, billowing outward from you.Withinityouseeleavescurlup,scrolls rot from their spindles, and the leather armor of your foes drip from their vulnerable forms.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You uncork the vial and pour out its contents, and the armor you designate begins to soften and ﬂow.  but must make a Constitution check (DC 10 +1 per previous success) each round thereafter to continue doing so. Failure on any such check (or voluntary resumption of breathing) causes the subject to fall unconscious (0 hp). On the next round, the subject drops to –1 hit points and is dying; on the third round, it suffocates (DMG 304).  You spit on your ﬁngers and whip your hand in a snakelike motion, imbuing it with poisoning magic. You infect the subject with a poison that saps willpower, dealing 1d10 points of Wisdom damage immediately and another 1d10 points of Wisdom damage 1 minute later. Each instance of damage can be negated by a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your Int or Cha modiﬁer, for wizards or sorcerers, respectively). Material Component: A piece of a toadstool.  141  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  MINDLESS RAGE  142  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes By waving a scarlet cloth and shouting taunts at your intended subject, you gain its undivided attention. You ﬁll the subject with so great a rage that it can do nothing but focus on engaging you in personal physical combat. The target must be able to see you when you cast this spell. If the subject later loses line of sight to you, the spell immediately ends. (A subject can’t voluntarily break line of sight with you, such as by closing its eyes, to end this spell prematurely.) If the subject threatens you, it must make a full attack against you using a melee weapon or a natural weapon. If the subject doesn’t threaten you at the start of its turn, it must move toward you (taking nothing but move actions) and end its movement as close to you as possible. If it gets close enough with a single move action to threaten you, it stops and makes a melee attack against you as normal. While under the effect of a mindless rage spell, the subject can make use of all its normal melee combat skills, abilities, and feats—either offensive or defensive. However, the subject can’t make ranged attacks, cast spells, or activate magic items that require a command word, a spell trigger, or spell completion to function. The subject can’t make any attack against a creature other than you. The subject of this spell, though overcome with rage, is by no means rendered idiotic or suicidal. For example, an affected creature will not charge off a cliff in an attempt to reach you. An interesting side effect of mindless rage occurs when the spell affects any character or creature that has the rage ability (such as a barbarian). In these cases, the mindless rage spell automatically activates the creature’s rage ability  (and counts as one of the creature’s uses of rage for that day). Focus: A scarlet handkerchief or similar piece of cloth, waved in the target’s direction while you vocalize the verbal component.  MINOR DISGUISE  Transmutation Level: Bard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour Yourﬁngertipsglowblue,andyouaddafew details to enhance your disguise. You use magic to make minor, cosmetic changes in your appearance. The spell does not change the actual structure of either your features or body. It can add color to hair, paint wrinkles upon your face, give you a scar, or darken your teeth. This spell gives you a +2 competence bonus on the next Disguise check you make during its duration.  MISER’S ENVY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Uponinvokingthepowerofthisspell,both thedwarfandthesmallidolacrosstheroom glow with a violet shade. The dwarf starts moving toward it, his eyes tinged violet with greed. When you cast this spell, you designate a target creature and specify an object, both of which must be within the spell’s range. If the target creature fails its saving throw, it becomes consumed by a powerful desire for the object. For the duration of the spell, the creature seeks to obtain the object (going so far as to attack anyone holding or wearing it). Once the creature gains possession of the object, it protects the item greed-  ily, attacking anyone who approaches within 30 feet or who otherwise appears to be trying to take the object away. If no one approaches within 30 feet or seems interested in trying to take the object, the subject can act normally. Dragons, due to their greedy nature, take a –4 penalty on their saving throws against this spell. Material Component: A copper piece.  MOMENT OF CLARITY Abjuration Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Youfeeladark,oppressiveweightpressing against your mind. When you touch your target, the weight lifts. The creature you touched seems now to be battling with a similar oppression. When you cast this spell and touch a creature that is under the inﬂuence of a mind-affecting spell or ability, that creature immediately receives another saving throw against the effect’s original DC to break free of the effect. If the spell or ability did not originally permit a saving throw, this spell has no effect.  MONSTROUS THRALL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Domination 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Calling upon your reserves of personal power, you reach outward with your mind and gain control of the will of your foe. This spell functions like true domination (page 224), except that the subject can be any creature and is permanently  Evocation Level: Moon 3 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A swordlike beam Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A 3-foot-long blazing beam of moonlight springs forth from your hand.  You call a swordlike beam of moonlight into your hand. Anyone who can cast moon blade can wield the beam with proﬁciency. However, if you are proﬁcient with any type of sword, you can wield the beam as if it were any type of sword and thus gain the beneﬁts of any special sword skill you might have, such as Weapon Focus. Attacks with a moon blade are melee touch attacks. Its strike saps vitality or life force, causing no visible wounds but dealing 1d8 points of damage +1 point per two caster levels (to a maximum of +10) to any type of creature except undead. Undead are visibly wounded by a moon blade. Their substance boils away from its touch, and they take 2d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (to a maximum of +20) per blow. The blade is immaterial, and your Strength modiﬁer does not apply to the damage. A successful moon blade strike temporarily scrambles magic. On the target’s next turn after a hit from a moon blade, the creature must make a Concentration check to use any spell or spell-like ability. The DC is equal to 10 + damage dealt + spell level. (An opponent hit by a moon blade while casting a spell must make the usual Concentration check to avoid losing the spell in addition to the check on its next turn.)  MOON BOLT  Evocation Level: Cleric 4, druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Target: One living or undead creature, or two living or undead creatures that are no more than 15 ft. apart; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half (living target) or Will negates (undead target) Spell Resistance: Yes Picturing a full moon in your mind you call upon the cyclical energies of the celestial body. You create a bolt of shimmering moonlight that streaks from your outstretched hand. A moon bolt strikes unerringly against any living or undead creature in range. A living creature struck by a moon bolt takes 1d4 points of Strength damage per three caster levels (maximum 5d4). If the subject makes a successful Fortitude saving throw, the Strength damage is halved. An undead creature struck by a moon bolt must make a Will save or fall helpless for 1d4 rounds, after which time it is no longer helpless and can stand upright, but it takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls and Will saving throws for the next minute.  MOON LUST  Illusion (Pattern) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Forcefully presenting a silver ingot in your hand, you extol the virtues of the moon’s beauty in a language both beautiful and dead.Thewordsofyourlovingdeclaration call forth a silver-white glow around your target that swiftly fades.  This spell instills in the target an obsessive fascination with the moon. If the target fails its save, it ﬁxates on the moon, staring at the moon or imagining it in its mind, and is considered fascinated for the duration of the spell. If the saving throw is successful, the subject is instead dazzled for the duration of the spell. Sightless creatures are not affected by this spell. Focus: A silver ingot worth 5 gp.  MOON PATH  Evocation [Force] Level: Moon 5 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A variable-width, glowing white stair or bridge of translucent force up to 15 ft./level long; see text Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  MOON BLADE  Arcane Material Component: A small candy made with wintergreen oil.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  dominated if it fails its initial Will save. A subject ordered to take an action against its nature receives a saving throw with a –4 penalty to resist taking that particular action. If the save succeeds, the subject still remains your thrall despite its minor mutiny. Once a subject makes a successful saving throw to resist a speciﬁc order, it makes all future saving throws to resist taking that speciﬁc action without a penalty.  Asyoucastthisspell,pure,palemoonlight shapes itself into a stair or bridge, as you desire. Moon path allows you to create a stair or bridge from one spot to another. The effect is a railless ribbon of glowing white translucent force like a glass strip. The strip can be from 3 to 20 feet wide as you decide. (You can vary the width over the ribbon’s length if you want.) It sticks to its endpoints unshakably, even if these endpoints are in midair. At the time of casting, you designate up to one creature per caster level to receive extra protection while standing on or moving along the moon path. Protected creatures gain the beneﬁt of a sanctuary effect. This functions like the 1st-level spell sanctuary except that the save DC is 15 + your Wis modiﬁer, and any subject of the spell who attacks breaks the sanctuary effect for all subjects. Protected creatures also stick to the top of the moon path as though they have received spider climb spells. A creature loses both beneﬁts immediately when it leaves the path. Unlike a wall of force, a moon path can be dispelled. It is otherwise similar to a wall of force in that it needs no supports and it is immune to damage of  143  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  all kinds. A disintegrate spell blasts a hole in the path 10 feet square, leaving the rest of the path intact. (If the moon path is 10 feet wide or less, this merely creates a 10-foot gap.) A hit from a rod of cancellation, a sphere of annihilation, or Mordenkainen’s disjunction destroys a moon path. Spells and breath weapons cannot pass through a moon path, although dimension door, teleport, and similar effects can bypass the barrier. It blocks ethereal creatures as well as material creatures. Gaze attacks cannot operate through a moon path. A moon path must be straight, continuous, and unbroken when formed. If its surface would be interrupted by any object or creature, the spell fails. The bridge version of the spell must be created ﬂat. The stair version cannot rise or descend any more sharply than 45 degrees. Arcane Material Component: A white handkerchief.  MOONBEAM  Evocation [Light] Level: Moon 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None or Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: No As you complete this spell, a swath of pale moonlight springs from your hand.  144  On your turn each round, you can change the direction the cone of light points. Light from a moonbeam spell does not adversely affect creatures that are sensitive to light, but lycanthropes in humanoid form caught in the cone must make a Will save to avoid involuntarily assuming their animal forms. A lycanthrope in animal form can change out of it on the creature’s next turn (spending a round in animal form). However, if it is still in the area of the spell, it must succeed on a Will save to do so. Once a lycanthrope successfully saves against moonbeam, it is not affected by any more of your moonbeam spells for 24 hours. Moonbeam penetrates any darkness spell of equal or lower level, but does  not counter or dispel it. Darkness spells of higher level block a moonbeam. Arcane Material Component: A pinch of white powder.  MOONBOW  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 1d4 motes of electricity Duration: Instantaneous or up to 4 rounds; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Sparks ﬂit among your ﬁngers as you call electricity from the surrounding air. This spell conjures three glowing motes of electricity. You direct any number of the motes to ﬂy off and strike targets within the spell’s range. Multiple motes can be ﬁred at the same target, or each can be sent against a separate target. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with a mote to strike a target. Any creature struck by a mote takes 1d6 points of electricity damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6). If you do not immediately ﬁre all the motes created by the spell, you can choose to ﬁre as many of the remaining ones as you wish as a standard action during the next round. If a round passes in which you do not ﬁre one of your motes, the spell ends and all remaining motes vanish. Material Component: A small piece of moonstone.  MOONFIRE  Evocation [Light] Level: Moon 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst and coneshaped emanation; see text Duration: Instantaneous and 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex half and Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes A cone of ﬁery white moonlight springs from your hand.  Living creatures in the area of a moonﬁre spell feel an unnatural chill and take 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d8). Undead and shapechangers take 1d8 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d8). This application of the spell allows a Reﬂex save for half damage. All magical auras within the cone glow with a faint blue light for 1 round per caster level. Disguised, shapechanged, or polymorphed creatures and objects in the spell’s area at the time the spell is cast must make Will saves or immediately return to their normal forms. Even if the save succeeds, they remain covered in ghostly white outlines that show their true forms for 1 round per caster level. The entire area covered by the cone glows silver-white for 1 round per caster level. This radiance is as bright as the light of a full moon and negates electricity damage for 1 round per caster level unless the item or creature generating the electricity effect makes a caster level check (1d20 + item’s caster level or creature’s caster level) against a DC equal to 10 + your caster level. If an electricity effect is generated outside the glowing cone, the cone blocks the electricity effect unless the creature generating the effect succeeds on a caster level check. If an electricity effect is generated inside the glowing cone, the cone negates the electricity effect unless the creature generating the effect succeeds on a caster level check.  MOUNTAIN STANCE  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No By calling upon the primordial powers of elemental earth, you complete the spell. A feelingofstubborndeterminationﬁllsyour soul until you touch the spell’s intended recipient. You see then in that creature a hint of the same feeling of determination. While this spell is in effect, the subject can root itself to the ground as a free  action. The subject gains a bonus equal to your caster level against any attempts to grapple, lift, push, bull rush, overrun, throw, trip, or otherwise force the subject to move against its will through either physical or magical means.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  If at any point such an effort succeeds and the subject is forced to move, the spell ends immediately. Any voluntary movement on the subject’s part does not end the spell (although a creature cannot be rooted while it moves), and the subject can “reroot” itself elsewhere in the same manner as described above.  MURDEROUS MIST  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Cloud spreads in a 30-ft. radius, 20 ft. high Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No Drawing the power of steaming volcanic ventsintoyourbody,youexhale,andacloud of boiling steam roils away from you.  You create a cloud of scalding hot steam that moves in a straight line, away from you, at a speed of 10 feet per round. Anyone within the cloud takes 2d6 points of damage and is permanently blinded. If a creature within the area makes a successful Reﬂex saving throw, it takes only half damage and is not blinded. Any creature within the cloud has concealment. Winds do not affect the cloud’s direction or speed. However, a moderate wind (11+ mph) disperses the cloud in 4 rounds, and a strong wind (21+ mph) disperses it in 1 round.  NATURE’S AVATAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Mountain stance makes holding your ground easy  With a touch, you gift your animal ally with nature’s strength, resilience, and speed. The affected animal gains a +10 morale bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls and 1d8 temporary hit points per caster level, plus the effect of a haste spell (PH 239).  NATURE’S BALANCE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Touching your friend, you concentrate, imagining a light ﬂowing from your body intohis.Asyoudoso,ablueglowﬂickersto life in the center of your chest, and it travels  145  downyourarmintohisform,grantinghim a portion of your power.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You take a –4 penalty to your choice of Strength, Dexterity, or Constitution, and your subject gains an equivalent bonus to the same ability score. You get no saving throw to avoid the loss, but your subject can attempt a Fortitude save to avoid the gain, if desired.  NATURE’S FAVOR  Evocation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 minute Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Rubbingtheanimal’sside,youwhisperthe ﬁnal bit of the spell’s ritual. The animal glances at you before turning its attention to your foes, bristling as it does so. You grant the subject animal a +1 luck bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls for every three caster levels you possess (maximum +5).  NATURE’S RAMPART  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Structure up to 40 ft. square Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a ﬁnal wave of your hand, the ground beneath your feet trembles and the landscape shifts into a new form. You shape a natural setting into a formidable defensive position. Usually this spell is used to prepare an open outdoor area such as a hillside or a forest, but a large natural cavern could be shaped into a divine rampart. Artiﬁcial structures or features are not affected, although nature’s rampart could be positioned to ﬁll a gap between two buildings or barricade an unpaved road. The effect of the spell depends on the terrain:  146  Open Outdoor Site: A rampart or dike of earth 5 feet high and 5 feet thick at its base rises immediately behind a shallow ditch 5 feet wide and 5 feet deep along the perimeter of the site. Creatures behind the dike receive cover. Attackers approaching on foot must scramble down into the ditch and then climbing 10 feet to reach the top of the dike (Climb DC 10). Rough Outdoor Site or Cavern: Loose stones and boulders, dead wood, and patches of dense briars are arranged to form a defensible wall 5 feet high and 2 feet thick at the base around the perimeter of the site. Creatures behind the wall receive cover. Marshy or Low-Lying Site: In areas such as marsh, bog, swamp, or tundra, nature’s rampart cannot raise a wall, but instead creates a water-ﬁlled ditch 10 feet wide and 5 feet deep. Creatures forced to wade the ditch are reduced to 1/4 their normal speed (minimum 5 feet) and cannot charge or run. Focus: A small quartz gem engraved with the image of an exquisite tiny castle, worth at least 100 gp.  NATUREWATCH  Necromancy Level: Druid 0, ranger 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped emanation Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Reaching out with your heart, you seek knowledge of the health of plants and animals in the area. This spell is similar to deathwatch (PH 217), but it functions only on animals and plants. In addition, it also allows you to determine a variety of other mundane information about the animals and plants (whether or not the plants are dehydrated, the animals are malnourished, and so forth).  NAUSEATING BREATH Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft.  Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No Youwindmillyourarmtocompletethespell andnearlygagbeforeexhalingagreatgout of putrid-smelling green gas. You breathe out a cone of nauseating vapors. Any creature in the area must succeed on a Fortitude save or be nauseated for 1d6 rounds. Material Component: A piece of ﬁsh at least one day old.  NEGATIVE ENERGY AURA  Necromancy Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Youspeaktheancientwordsofthisspelland anauraofblack,cracklingnegativeenergy surrounds you. Each round on your turn, every living creature within 10 feet of you loses 1 hit point per three caster levels (maximum 5). Undead creatures instead gain 2 hit points per round (though they can’t exceed their full normal hit point total from this effect). Characters with immunity to negative energy effects are not affected by this aura. The aura does not affect you.  NERVESKITTER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes You suffuse your ally with a brief, blue glow. He jerks away from you, as if he can anticipate your next action. You cast this spell when you and your party roll for initiative. You enhance  the subject’s reactions in combat, granting it a +5 bonus on its initiative check for the current encounter. If the subject does not make an initiative check within 1 round, this spell has no effect.  NET OF SHADOWS  NIGHTMARE LULLABY  Yourmusiccalmsyourfoe,sendingittosleep whileitremainsupright.Asyouperform,it starts to twitch and moan, as if tormented by unseen fears.  This spell gives the subjects concealment, but the shifting magic shadows also inhibit the subjects’ ability to ascer-  This spell can put a target into a surreal, sleepwalking state. The target must make a Will saving throw or become  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Atouchfromyourhand,whichshedsdarknessliketheblackestnight,disruptsthelife force of a living creature. Your touch deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) and 1d6+2 points of Constitution damage. (A successful Fortitude saving throw negates the Constitution damage.) The spell has a special effect on an undead creature. An undead touched  The nauseating breath spell can effectively incapacitate foes  Illus. by R. Horsley  You cast the spell, and the surrounding shadows shift at your command, ﬂying toward your targets and wrapping themselves around them.  NIGHT’S CARESS  CHAPTER 1  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  confused, thinking it has entered a nightmare.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Illusion (Shadow) [Darkness] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 25 ft. apart Duration: 1d6 rounds Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  tain their surroundings. The subjects can see only 5 feet through the shadows that coat them, and foes within that range have concealment from the subjects. Darkvision does not penetrate a net of shadows.  147  by you takes no damage or Constitution loss, but it must make a successful Will saving throw or ﬂee as if panicked for 1d4 rounds +1 round per caster level.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  NIGHTSHIELD  Abjuration Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) With a whisper-quiet whoosh, a ﬁeld of shadowy energy cloaks your body. This spell provides a +1 resistance bonus on saving throws; this resistance bonus increases to +2 at caster level 6th and +3 at caster level 9th. In addition, the spell negates magic missile attacks directed at you.  NIGHTSTALKER’S TRANSFORMATION  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Moving the potion you hold in a circle beforeyou,youﬁnishspeakingthewordsof the spell before quafﬁng the potion in one gulp. A moment later you feel discomfort as your connection to the arcane energies of the world around you slips away. In its place, you ﬁnd your mind and body ﬁlled with abilities you lacked before. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +3 luck bonus to Armor Class, a +5 luck bonus on Reﬂex saving throws, a +5 competence bonus on Spot, Listen, Hide, and Move Silently checks, and proﬁciency with all simple weapons plus the hand crossbow, rapier, sap, shortbow, and short sword. You also gain the Weapon Finesse feat and the evasion ability (PH 50). You deal an extra 3d6 points of damage whenever you attack an opponent that you ﬂank or an opponent denied its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class. This extra damage works like the rogue’s sneak attack ability.  148  You lose your spellcasting ability for the duration of the spell, including your ability to use spell trigger or spell completion magic items, just as if the spells were no longer on your class list. Material Component: A potion of cat’s grace, which you drink (and whose effect is subsumed by this spell’s effect).  NIMBUS OF LIGHT  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 1, Puriﬁcation 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level or until discharged (D) A glittering corona of sunlight surrounds your body at a few inches distance—until you release it as a focused blast of divine energy. The nimbus of light around you glows like a lantern, providing bright illumination in a 30-foot radius (and shadowy illumination for an additional 30 feet) from you. As a move action, you can coalesce the energy from a nimbus of light around your outstretched arm, and then as a standard action ﬂing it toward a foe within 30 feet. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the energy to strike a target. A nimbus of light deals 1d8 points of damage +1 point per round that has elapsed since you cast the spell (maximum 1d8 + caster level). Attacking with a nimbus of light ends the spell, whether your ranged touch attack is successful or not.  NIXIE’S GRACE  Transmutation [Water] Level: Bard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You feel a longing for cool waters, and a forcefulconﬁdencemanifestswithinyou. Your movements and thoughts become ﬁlled with grace.  This potent spell infuses you with powerful fey magic, granting you many of the traits and abilities of a nixie (MM 235). Upon casting this spell, you gain a swim speed of 30 feet. You can breathe underwater, and you gain low-light vision and damage reduction 5/cold iron. You also gain a +6 enhancement bonus to Dexterity, a +2 enhancement bonus to Wisdom, and a +8 enhancement bonus to Charisma. Focus: A lock of nixie’s hair, freely given to you by a nixie.  OBEDIENT AVALANCHE Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Cold 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 20-ft.-radius avalanche of snow centered on a point in space; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half or Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  You summon an avalanche of snow out of a rift in midair, burying your foes and sending them to a frosty death. An obedient avalanche spell affects creatures differently, depending on where they are in relation to the avalanche. Within 20 feet of the Center Point: Creatures take 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d8) and an additional 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels. A successful Reﬂex save halves the damage. Creatures who fail their saves are also buried (DMG 90). All squares within 20 feet of the center point are covered in heavy snow (DMG 94), which persists as long as ordinary snow would. A buried creature can free itself with a DC 20 Strength check as a full-round action, and can be dug free by others (a single creature working alone requires 1 minute to free a trapped creature). A trapped creature is unable to move, and cannot cast spells with somatic components, and any material components must be in hand. Between 20 feet and 40 feet of the Center Point: Creatures take half as much damage from the impact of the avalanche as the creatures nearer the  Divination Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, Liberation 1, ranger 1 Components: V, F Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous A brief supplication gives you a vision that hints at how dangerous the immediate future is likely to be. Based on an assessment of your immediate surroundings and chosen path of travel, you receive one of three visions that reﬂect the next hour’s journey: safety, peril, or great danger. The base chance for receiving an accurate reply is 70% +1% per caster level, to a maximum of 90%; the DM makes the roll secretly. If the omen of peril is successful, you get one of three visions, which lasts just a second or two. • Safety: You aren’t in any immediate danger. If you continue on your present course (or remain where you are if you have been stationary for some time before casting the spell), you will face no signiﬁcant monsters, traps, or other challenges for the next hour or so.  If the roll fails, you get one of the two incorrect results, determined randomly by the DM, and you don’t necessarily know that you failed because the DM rolls secretly. Choosing which vision is “correct” takes some educated guesswork on the part of the DM, who should assess the characters’ likely courses of action and what dangers they’re likely to face. The exact form that an omen of peril takes depends on whether you worship a speciﬁc deity, venerate nature as a druid, or simply uphold abstract principles. A druid might see a white dove for safety, a dark cloud obscuring the sun for peril, and a forest ﬁre for great danger. A cleric of Fharlanghn might get a vision of a straight road for safety, a crossroads for peril, and a washed-out bridge for great danger. Unlike the more powerful augury spell (PH 202), an omen of peril doesn’t respond to a speciﬁc question. It indicates only the level of danger likely for the next hour, not what form the danger will take. Focus: A set of marked sticks, bones, or similar tokens worth at least 25 gp.  ONE WITH THE LAND Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  You cast the spell and are bathed in a golden-greenlightfromabove.Asitfades, you feel in touch with your natural surroundings.  Move Silently, Search, Survival, and wild empathy checks.  ONE MIND  Divination Level: Paladin 2 This spell functions like lesser one mind, except as noted here, and in addition it allows you and your special mount to predict each other’s movements, giving you a signiﬁcant edge in combat. You and your mount both gain a +2 bonus on attack rolls as long as you are mounted.  CHAPTER 1  OMEN OF PERIL  • Peril: You will face challenges typical of an adventure: challenging but not overwhelming monsters, dangerous traps, and other hazards for the next hour or so. • Great Danger: Your very life is at grave risk. You will likely face powerful NPCs or deadly traps in the next hour.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  center point took (Reﬂex negates). Creatures who fail their saves must also resist the force of the snow moving past them as if they were being bull rushed. The snow has a +13 attack bonus (+5 for effective Strength of 20 and +8 for effectively being Huge) on the bull rush check, and it pushes characters away from the center point of the spell. All squares in the 20-foot to 40-foot ring are covered in snow (DMG 94), which persists as long as ordinary snow would. Terrain and Structures: The avalanche uproots small trees and other vegetation automatically, and it leaves a trail of light rubble (DMG 91) even after the snow melts. Structures struck by an obedient avalanche take 1d6×10 points of damage. An obedient avalanche extinguishes all ﬂames it touches, whether they are normal or magical.  ONE MIND, GREATER Divination Level: Paladin 3  This spell functions like one mind, except as noted here, and in addition you and your mount gain a +2 bonus on melee damage rolls as long as you are mounted.  ONE MIND, LESSER  Divination Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level Your mount begins to move in a predictable, complementary manner to yourself. It positions itself to maximize its effectiveness as a combat partner, and you feel that your actions instinctively do the same for it. You temporarily strengthen the mental bond with your special mount when you cast this spell. When you are mounted on your special mount, the link with your mount sharpens your senses, giving you a +4 insight bonus on Spot and Listen checks and the scent ability (MM 314) for the duration of the spell. If your mount ever moves more than 10 feet from you, the spell ends.  You forge a strong link with nature that gives you greater insight into your environment. You gain a +2 competence bonus on Handle Animal, Hide,  149  OOZE PUPPET  With a few chanted words and a mystic pass of your arm, your magic reaches out to invisibly surround the ooze, placing it under your control. You telekinetically take control of the targeted ooze, manipulating it and forcing  Illus. by C. Dien  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One ooze Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  it to move and attack as you see ﬁt. You can force the ooze to perform as you desire, within the limits of its abilities. Controlling the ooze’s actions for an entire round is a move action for you. When the ooze is not directed to move, attack, or undertake any actions by you, telekinetic force holds it immobile. Once control is established, you must have line of sight to the ooze to manipulate it, but distance is not otherwise a factor, unless you and the ooze are on different planes (at which point the spell ends). If a controlled ooze splits, such as a black pudding (MM 201) struck by a slashing weapon, you retain control of only one of the resultant oozes (choose randomly).  OPALESCENT GLARE  Necromancy [Death, Good] Level: Arborea 4, Cleric 6, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youinvokethespellandyoureyesbeginto glow with a rippling pearly radiance, like those of a noble ghaele eladrin. Inspired by the deadly gaze of the noble ghaele eladrin, you gain a gaze attack usable against creatures within 60 feet. If an evil creature with 5 or fewer Hit Dice meets your gaze (DMG 294), it dies unless it succeeds on a Will save. Even if the save succeeds, the creature is affected as though by a fear spell (PH 229) for 2d10 rounds. Non-evil creatures and evil creatures with more than 5 Hit Dice are not slain by the gaze, and they suffer the fear effect only if they fail the Will save.  ORB OF ACID  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One orb of acid Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: No An orb of acid about 3 inches across shoots from your palm at its target, dealing 1d6 points of acid damage per caster level (maximum 15d6). You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit your target. A creature struck by the orb takes damage and becomes sickened by the acid’s noxious fumes for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save negates the sickened effect but does not reduce the damage.  ORB OF ACID, LESSER  150  The ooze puppet spell telekinetically controls an ooze creature  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One orb of acid Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Yourquick,precisemovementsculminatein youropenpalmfacingyourtarget.Anorbof dark green acid ﬂies from your hand.  Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of cold This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals cold damage. In addition, a creature struck by an orb of cold must make a Fortitude save or be blinded for 1 round instead of being sickened.  ORB OF COLD, LESSER Conjuration (Creation) [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of cold  Your hand takes on a blue tint and your ﬁngersturnnumbandunresponsiveasyou completethespell.Fromyourchilledpalm ﬂies an orb composed of blue ice. This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals cold damage.  ORB OF ELECTRICITY  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of electricity This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals electricity damage. In addition, a creature wearing metal armor struck by an orb of electricity must make a Fortitude save or be entangled for 1 round instead of being sickened.  The air crackles around your outstretched hand and the smell of ozone assaults your nostrils as a ball of electrical energy, its surface crackling with bolts of lightning, streaks from your open palm. This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals electricity damage.  ORB OF FIRE  Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of ﬁre This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals ﬁre damage. In addition, a creature struck by an orb of ﬁre must make a Fortitude save or be dazed for 1 round instead of being sickened.  ORB OF FIRE, LESSER Conjuration (Creation) [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of ﬁre  Your hand heats to an uncomfortable temperaturejustmomentsbeforeyourelease the spell’s energy in the form of an orb of whiteﬂamesspeedingfromyouroutwardfacing palm. This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals ﬁre damage.  ORB OF FORCE  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One orb of force Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you gather the energies of the spell, you feel against your palm a spherical weight that seems almost bonded to your skin. Thespheregrows,untilwithaﬁnalprecise movement, you release the translucent  You create a globe of force 3 inches across, which streaks from your palm toward your target. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit the target. The orb deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d6).  ORB OF SOUND  Conjuration (Creation) [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One orb of sonic energy Symbolsrecognizableasmusicalnotation— thevisualrepresentationofsound—appear in midair within the curve of your palm accompanied by the fractious sounds they represent. The notes begin to whirl and stretch,formingintoasphericalwhirlwind of cacophonic chaos, as you make ready to releasethespell.Atlast,yousendthesphere of noise toward your chosen target.  CHAPTER 1  ORB OF COLD  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of electricity  blue orb, sending it hurtling toward your intended target.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  An orb of acid about 2 inches across shoots from your palm at its target, dealing 1d8 points of acid damage. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack to hit your target. For every two caster levels beyond 1st, your orb deals an additional 1d8 points of damage: 2d8 at 3rd level, 3d8 at 5th level, 4d8 at 7th level, and the maximum of 5d8 at 9th level or higher.  ORB OF ELECTRICITY, LESSER  This spell functions like orb of acid, except that it deals 1d4 points of sonic damage per level (maximum 15d4). In addition, a creature struck by an orb of sound must make a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1 round instead of being sickened.  ORB OF SOUND, LESSER Conjuration (Creation) [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Effect: One orb of sonic energy  This spell functions like lesser orb of acid, except that it deals 1d6 points of sonic damage, plus an additional 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels beyond 1st: 2d6 at 3rd level, 3d6 at 5th level, 4d6 at 7th level, and the maximum of 5d6 at 9th level or higher.  OTYUGH SWARM  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Pestilence 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Three or more otyughs, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: Seven days or seven months (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  151  Illus. by J. Engle  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You smell an otyugh swarm before you see it  Focusing your will on a disgusting pile of refuse, you cause toothed and tentacled horrors to rise up and stalk about at your command. Otyugh swarm creates otyughs from a large collection of refuse and ﬁlth, such as a sewer or cesspool. You can choose to create 3d4 ordinary otyughs (MM 204) or 1d3+1 Huge otyughs with 15 HD (MM 292). The otyughs willingly aid you in combat or battle, perform a speciﬁc mission, or serve as bodyguards. They remain with you for seven days unless you dismiss them. If the otyughs are created only for guard duty, the duration of the spell is seven months. In this case, the otyughs must be ordered to guard only a speciﬁc site or location. Otyughs summoned to guard duty cannot move outside the spell’s range. You must create the otyughs in an area containing at least 6,000 pounds of sewage, refuse, or offal. After you cast the spell, otyughs not summoned for guard duty can leave the area of offal at your command.  152  OWL’S INSIGHT  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) As you cast this spell, your face is overlaid with the image of a snow owl. The image fades as you bestow your ally with comprehension. The subject gains an insight bonus to Wisdom equal to 1/2 your caster level.  PANACEA  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 4, druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched  Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You kneel next to your afﬂicted comrade and speak the soft words of this spell. At your touch a golden radiance infuses your companion. This spell channels positive energy into a creature to wipe away its afﬂictions. It immediately ends any of the following conditions affecting the subject: blinded, confused, dazed, dazzled, deafened, diseased, exhausted, fatigued, frightened, nauseated, panicked, paralyzed, shaken, sickened, and stunned. It negates sleep effects and the effect of the feeblemind spell, and ends any additional effects from poison, as the neutralize poison spell. It also cures 1d8 points of damage + 1 point per caster level (maximum +20). Panacea does not remove ability damage, negative levels, or drained levels. Used against an undead creature, panacea deals damage instead of curing the creature (which takes half damage  if it makes a Will saving throw), but it has no other effect.  PAVILION OF GRANDEUR  PERINARCH  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, Limbo 4, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels)  This spell grants temporary control over the terrain of Limbo. Normally, unless controlled, the Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo (DMG 158) is just what the plane’s name implies: a roiling soup of energy and elements. Natives learn to control it or to inhabit areas that have enjoyed some measure of control for a long period, but visitors to areas of “raw” limbo must make a DC 16 Wisdom check to gain control over the dangerous roil. The perinarch spell gives you automatic control of a radius of raw Limbo (an area not already stabilized or within some other creature’s control) in close range. Control allows you to reshape the raw limbo as you desire,  A pavilion of grandeur spell provides adventurers with a spectacular resting place between battles  Illus. by B. Hagan  You conjure up a grand pavilion-sized tent that has a single entrance on the plane from which the spell was cast. The entry point looks like a faint shimmering in the air that is 10 feet wide by 15 feet high. Only those you  Limbo impinges on all sides—colors, sounds,andelements.Youspeakthewords and feel the power of the plane buckle withinyourmind,thenrelaxasyouimpress order upon the chaos.  CHAPTER 1  Thinking sweet thoughts of home and hearth, you conjure an invisible bastion of comfort and security.  Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: None (object) and Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Creation 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Extradimensional pavilion, up to ﬁve 10-ft. cubes/level (S), plus feast for 12 creatures/level Duration: 24 hours/level (D) plus 12 hours; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  designate can enter the pavilion, and the entrance is shut and made invisible behind you when you enter. You can open it again from your own side at will. Once observers have passed beyond the entrance, they are in a spacious tent decorated in the colors of your faith. The lighting can vary between darkness and daylight, and the temperature between 40 and 90 degrees Fahrenheit, at your discretion when casting the spell. The pavilion is sumptuously furnished, including a full meal for a dozen creatures per caster level. Anyone who spends 1 hour dining here gains beneﬁts identical to those of a heroes’ feast spell (PH 240). While in the pavilion, creatures heal naturally at double the normal rate (not including fast healing or regeneration).  153  Illus. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  adding or subtracting one of the four basic elements once per round as a standard action. A favorite among travelers from the Material Plane is a chunk of earth surrounded by a small atmosphere of air. The effect of this spell overlaps with the control already (potentially) established with a Wisdom check. Your allies can give their control over to you concurrently with the spell being cast, if they so choose. Control cannot be wrested away from you while the spell is in effect (which is one of the best reasons to cast this spell, even if you have a high Wisdom). If you move more than 100 feet away from the area that you controlled, the order you imposed fades away. You are unable to achieve any works of complexity within an area you control, but you can mix two or three elements in a crude fashion; a few examples are provided below. You can attempt to seize control of a new area that already contains foes; however, foes can make a Reﬂex save to get out of the area. Thick Barrier: You can “thicken” empty air with dust and rock, creating a zone around yourself and your allies that outside creatures must hack or force a way through. Their speed drops to 5 feet, or 10 feet for Large or larger creatures. Fiery Barrier: You can create a thick ﬁeld of ﬂame that deals 3d10 points of ﬁre damage to any creature attempting to pass through it. The ﬁeld also deals 3d10 points of ﬁre damage for each round a creature lingers within it. Complete Barrier: You can create a complete barrier of solid stone up to 1 foot thick encircling yourself and your allies, preventing access by any other than the most accomplished tunnelers. On the other hand, you can attempt to trap foes within their own bubble of solid stone.  PERINARCH, PLANAR  Transmutation Level: Druid 9, Limbo 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9  154  The god’s domain was made entirely of water, but your spell creates a bubble of air and a place to stand. This spell functions like perinarch, except that you can cast this spell on any highly morphic or divinely morphic plane (DMG 148).  (for sorcerers and wizards, respectively) and deals 1d4 points of damage, with a critical threat range of 19–20. If an ally also attacks the creature, the blade moves on your turn to ﬂank the target. As a force effect, it can strike ethereal and incorporeal creatures. The blade cannot be attacked. Each round after the ﬁrst, you can use a standard action to switch the blade to a new target; otherwise, it continues to attack the same target. If an attacked creature has spell resistance, the resistance is checked the ﬁrst time the persistent blade strikes. If the blade is successfully resisted, the spell is dispelled. If not, the blade has its normal full effect on that creature for the duration of the spell. Focus: A silvered dagger.  PHANTASMAL ASSAILANTS  Although only in the mind of the spell’s target, phantasmal assailants inﬂict very real harm to the weak-willed  PERSISTENT BLADE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One dagger made of force Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdadaggerinyourhandandconcentrate on it, evoking the power of the spell. A duplicateofthedagger,madeoftranslucent force,appearsbesidesitandﬂiesoffatyour command. You bring into being a tiny blade of force. The blade ﬂies at a speed of 40 feet (perfect) and attacks any target within its range, as you desire, starting in the round when you cast the spell. The blade attacks on your turn once each round, striking with an attack bonus equal to your base attack bonus + 1/2 your Cha modiﬁer or Int modiﬁer  Illusion (Phantasm) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with), then Fortitude half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youpointatyourintendedtarget.Instantly, shadowy shapes form at your ﬂank and rush toward the creature you indicate, surroundingit.Othersnearbydonotnoticethe images that plague your target. You create phantasmal images of nightmare creatures in the target’s mind, visible only as shadowy shapes to you and unseen by all others. If the target succeeds on an initial Will save, it recognizes that the images are not real, and the spell fails. If not, the phantasms strike the target, dealing 8 points of Wisdom damage and 8 points of Dexterity damage (4 points each on a successful Fortitude save). If the subject of a phantasmal assailant succeeds in disbelieving and is wearing a helm of  telepathy, the spell can be turned back upon you with the same effect.  PHANTASMAL DECOY  You create a phantasmal image of the subject’s most hated enemy by sifting through the subconscious mind of the subject. Only you and the spell’s subject can see the phantasmal creature, and the phantasm seems blurry and indistinct to you. If the target fails its Will saving throw, you designate a space that the phantasm appears to occupy. The subject must attack the phantasm, or move to be adjacent to it. A creature that attacks the phantasm is allowed an additional saving throw to disbelieve the illusion. If moving up to the phantasm would cause the subject to cross dangerous terrain (such as a pool of lava), it does not move to be adjacent to the phantasm. It merely moves as close as it can and takes no further actions unless the phantasm moves to a space it can reach. As a move action, you can move a phantasmal decoy up to 60 feet in any direction. Because it’s not real, a phantasmal decoy isn’t affected by terrain that slows movement (although you can slow its progress voluntarily if you like to help maintain the facade of realism).  PHANTASMAL DISORIENTATION  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  PHANTASMAL THIEF  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Greed 8, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One invisible, mindless, shapeless thief Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Asyouinvokethisspell,thespoolbeginsto spin, the thread vanishing as it unravels. There is a wrinkle of force that ﬂashes brieﬂy; then it evaporates, leaving only the promise of power behind. An invisible force, not unlike the product of an unseen servant spell (PH 297), comes into being where you wish. On your turn, this force steals objects from others as you inaudibly direct it (a free action). A phantasmal thief can steal an object from a creature or can pick up an unattended object, as long as the  CHAPTER 1  Reaching into your foe’s mind, you weave an illusion of his most hated foe.  The target of a phantasmal disorientation spell must make a Will save after this spell is cast to discern true landmarks from phantasmal ones. If the save succeeds, the creature moves and acts normally. If the save fails, it instead moves in a direction 90 degrees to either side (equal chance of going left or right), and cannot target any creature with ranged attacks or ranged spells. Because of the disorientation, the subject doesn’t realize it’s headed in the wrong direction until it meaningfully interacts with its environment (by making an attack or manipulating an object such as a door, for example). For the duration of the spell, an affected creature must succeed on a Will save each round to move normally. A phantasmal disorientation spell affects only the direction of movement and attacks made at range. Creatures subject to it can still make melee attacks, cast personal or touch spells, or otherwise act normally.  object weighs no more than 1 pound per caster level. It cannot break into locked chests. A phantasmal thief has a Hide modiﬁer (useful against those who can see invisible creatures) and a Move Silently modiﬁer both equal to your caster level. If a phantasmal thief goes undetected, it can steal any object a creature possesses but is not holding or wearing. Even objects in a bag of holding can be stolen. It can steal objects, bring objects to you, or put them back where they came from. It can take no other actions. A phantasmal thief needs 1 round to steal an object and another round to bring it to you. A phantasmal thief can hold only one object at a time, and the object becomes invisible in its grasp. A thief cannot take an item if it is detected by the creature it’s trying to steal from (with a Listen or Spot check). However, the thief can repeat the attempt in the next round. It cannot be harmed in any way, although it can be dispelled. A phantasmal thief can steal an object from a creature’s hand by making a successful disarm attempt. It does so with a bonus on the disarm check equal to your caster level. If a phantasmal thief is used in this way, it disappears after it brings the stolen object to you. Material Component: A spool of green thread.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates, and Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: Yes  Youcreateever-shiftingphantasmalterrain and landmarks that confuse the subject when it tries to move. The very ground shifts and twists beneath the subject’s feet, andthelandscapemovesofitsownaccord. The subject ﬁnds it nearly impossible to walk in a straight line.  PHANTOM BEAR  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One summoned phantom bear Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The ghostly image of a great bear appears before you. It rises silently on its hind legs and violently falls onto its forepaws, still making no sound. Then it opens its mouth, releasing a tremendous roar. This spell functions like phantom wolf (page 157), except that you conjure an incorporeal bear with a fearsome roar.  155  Phantom Bear  CR 14  N Huge magical beast (incorporeal) Init +9; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Listen +20, Spot +20  Illus. by E. Polak  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  AC 25, touch 25, flat-footed 16; Dodge, Mobility hp 147 (14 HD) Fort +13, Ref +17, Will +7  156  Speed fly 60 ft. (good) Melee 2 claws +23 incorporeal touch (2d6 plus 3d6 cold) and bite +22 incorporeal touch (2d8 plus 3d6 cold) Space 15 ft.; Reach 15 ft. Base Atk +14; Grp — Atk Options Combat Reflexes Special Actions fearsome roar Abilities Str —, Dex 29, Con 20, Int 11, Wis 17, Cha 28 SQ incorporeal traits Feats Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility, Multiattack, Weapon Focus (bite) Skills Listen +20, Spot +20 Fearsome Roar (Su) 120-ft. radius, once every 1d4 rounds, Will DC 26 negates. Creatures within 30 feet become panicked, others within the area become frightened for 3d6 rounds if they fail their saves.  PHANTOM FOE  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Assassin 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief Spell Resistance: No By waving around a tiny pewter ﬁgurine and picturing in your mind the ﬁgurine attackingthetargetcreature,youcomplete the spell. You feel a phantasmal force leap from the ﬁgurine toward your target. If the target creature fails its saving throw, this spell creates in the subject’s mind an illusory double of whichever creature currently threatens it that it deems most dangerous. The form of this phantom foe changes as appropriate whenever the target perceives a different threatening creature more dangerous than the last. This illusory double provides two effects.  First, the subject believes it is being ﬂanked by the phantom foe and the real creature the foe duplicates. Thus, the duplicated creature is always considered to be ﬂanking the subject in melee. A creature that can’t be ﬂanked is immune to this aspect of the spell. Second, the subject of the spell is unable to determine that the phantom foe is not a real threat, and whenever the subject attempts to attack the creature duplicated by the phantom foe, that creature beneﬁts from a 50% miss chance against attacks from the subject of the spell. Because this miss chance comes from the subject’s inability to tell the phantom foe from the original, it is rolled separately from any miss chance that applies due to displacement or concealment. Creatures other than the subject cannot see the phantom foe, although they can attempt to guess its location by how the target acts. If the subject is not threatened by any creature at the start of its turn, the spell ends. Focus: A tiny pewter ﬁgure of a warrior that is worth 10 gp.  The phantom stag spell provides a druid with a powerful mount to ride into battle  PHANTOM STAG  You conjure a Large, corporeal staglike creature that bears you or a person you designate into combat or overland at great speed. A phantom stag has a black body and head with sharp, silvery antlers, and smoke-colored, insubstantial hooves that make no sound. It has no saddle, bridle, or bit, but it is exceptionally alert to the nudges and balance changes of its rider. The phantom stag has an AC of 20 (–1 size, +6 natural armor, +5 Dex) and 40 hit points +5 hit points per caster level. It attacks with its antlers at a +10 bonus, dealing 1d8+9 points of damage (doubled on a successful charge). It can also trample Medium or smaller foes, who must succeed on a Reﬂex save (18 + 1/2 your caster level) or take 1d6+9 points of damage as the stag moves through their space. A phantom stag has a speed of 20 feet per caster level, to a maximum of 300 feet. It can bear its rider’s weight plus up to 10 pounds per caster level in other gear. It ignores terrain elements such as undergrowth, rubble, or mud that would slow its movement. Phantom stags gain certain powers according to caster level. A mount’s abilities include those associated with any lower caster levels. 12th Level: The phantom stag can use air walk at will (as the spell, PH 196, no action required to activate this ability) for up to 1 round at a time, after which it falls to the ground. The phantom stag gains a +2 deﬂection bonus to AC. 14th Level: The phantom stag can ﬂy at its speed (average maneuverability). The phantom stag gains a +4 deﬂection bonus to AC.  PHANTOM THREAT  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Reachingouttoyourfoe’smind,youcause him to feel as though a threat looms close behind no matter which way he turns. You create the sensation in the subject’s mind that it is threatened by more foes than it actually faces. Though the subject doesn’t actually perceive any additional enemies (and thus doesn’t waste any attacks on the phantasm), a creature affected by this spell is considered ﬂanked, even if not threatened by other creatures. No amount of convincing by others can help the subject of this spell avoid its effect—only a successful saving throw against the spell when initially cast can help the target. A creature that can’t be ﬂanked is immune to this spell.  PHANTOM WOLF  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One summoned phantom wolf Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Cupping a hand to your mouth, you howl likeawolf,andinamoment,mistcoalesces into a wolﬂike form with terrible jaws.  CR 12  N Large magical beast (incorporeal) Init +9; Senses darkvision 60 ft.; Listen +20, Spot +20 Aura frightful presence AC 25, touch 25, flat-footed 16; Dodge, Mobility hp 113 (12 HD) Fort +12, Ref +17, Will +7 Speed fly 60 ft. (good) Melee bite +22 incorporeal touch (2d6 plus 3d6 cold) Space 15 ft.; Reach 15 ft. Base Atk +14; Grp — Atk Options Combat Reflexes  CHAPTER 1  Putting your ﬁngers to your lips to whistle, you blow a deer’s call, and a great ghostly stag appears before you.  Phantom Wolf  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: One quasi-real, staglike creature Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No  16th Level: The phantom stag’s antlers have the ghost touch (DMG 224) and wounding (DMG 226) weapon special abilities. The phantom stag gains a +6 deﬂection bonus to AC. 18th Level: The phantom stag can use etherealness on behalf of its rider (as the spell, PH 228, caster level 18th). The phantom stag gains a +8 deﬂection bonus to AC.  Abilities Str —, Dex 29, Con 18, Int 11, Wis 17, Cha 26 SQ incorporeal traits Feats Alertness, Combat Reflexes, Dodge, Mobility, Weapon Focus (bite) Skills Listen +20, Spot +20 Frightful Presence (Su) 30-ft. radius, Will DC 24 negates. Creatures with less than 12 HD become frightened for 3d6 rounds if they fail their saves. An opponent that succeeds on the save is immune to that same phantom wolf’s frightful presence for 24 hours.  You conjure forth an incorporeal white wolf with abnormally large, frosty jaws. This phantom wolf follows your mental commands, acting on your behalf as long as it remains within range and you continue to concentrate on it. A phantom wolf appears where you designate and acts as you direct on your turn. You don’t need to maintain line of effect once the spell is cast, but the spell ends if the phantom wolf is ever outside the spell’s range.  PLAGUE OF RATS  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Pestilence 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One swarm of rats/2 levels, each of which is adjacent to at least one other swarm Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  157  Illus. by W. England  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Black balls of fur litter the ground, rolling aboutastheyrapidlyexpand,growingtails, feet, and snarling, diseased mouths. You summon a number of rat swarms (MM 239)—one per two caster levels—to a maximum of six swarms at 12th level. The swarms must be summoned so that each one is adjacent to at least one other swarm (that is, the swarms must ﬁll one contiguous area). You can summon the rat swarms so that they share the spaces of other creatures. Each swarm attacks any creatures occupying its space. If no living creatures are within its space, a swarm attacks or pursues the nearest creature as best it can. You have no control over its target or direction of travel.  PLANAR BUBBLE  Abjuration Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation from touched creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No; see text  PLAGUE OF UNDEAD  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One or more corpses within range Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Unleashing a cold rush of necromantic energy, you cause a host of undead to rise from the bodies of the fallen. This spell turns the bones or bodies of dead creatures into undead skeletons (MM 225) or zombies (MM 265) with maximum hit points for their Hit Dice. If you can control them, these undead follow your spoken commands. The undead remain animated until destroyed (a destroyed skeleton or zombie can’t be animated again). Regardless of the speciﬁc numbers or kinds of undead created with this spell, you can’t create more HD of undead with this spell than four times  158  of this spell or animate dead become uncontrolled. Any time you must release part of the undead that you control because of this spell or animate dead, you choose which undead are released until the total HD of undead you control is equal to four times your caster level. The bones and bodies required for this spell follow the same restrictions as animate dead. Material Component: A black sapphire worth 100 gp or several black sapphires with a total value of 100 gp.  Clerics who follow gods of pestilence can summon a plague of rats  your caster level with a single casting of plague of undead. The undead you create remain under your control indeﬁnitely. No matter how many times you use this spell or animate dead (PH 198), however, you can control only 4 HD worth of undead creatures per caster level. The limit imposed by this spell and the animate dead spell are the same, meaning that creatures you animate with either spell count against this limit. If you exceed this number, all the newly created creatures fall under your control and any excess undead from previous castings  You cast the spell and sprinkle silver dust aroundyou.Where it lands the dust sparkles and evaporates,and the elemental region around you calmsandbecomes more hospitable. This spell creates an area around the subject creature that emulates its native planar environment. Thus, a character hailing from the Material Plane would have normal gravity, temperature, magic, and so on. This spell cast on a native of the Plane of Shadow (DMG 152) would make the area around the creature mimic its home plane’s normal gravity, a mild neutral alignment, enhanced shadow spells, and impeded light or ﬁre spells.  Arcane Material Component: A sprinkling of silver dust.  PLANAR EXCHANGE  Conjuration (Calling) [see text for lesser planar exchange] Level: Cleric 6  Conjuration (Calling) [see text for lesser planar exchange] Level: Cleric 8  This spell functions like lesser planar exchange, except as noted here. You trade places with a leonal guardinal (MM 142), barbed devil (MM 51), or hezrou demon (MM 44). The called creature has full access to all its abilities, with one exception: A demon or devil you conjure can’t summon other creatures. If the creature is slain, you take 4d6 points of damage and the spell ends.  PLANAR EXCHANGE, LESSER Conjuration (Calling) Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: 0 ft. Effect: One called creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You cross your arms and close your eyes, intoning the ancient spell. There is a bright ﬂash, and another creature stands in your place. When you cast this spell, you call a celestial brown bear (MM 269), celestial griffon (MM 139), ﬁendish dire ape (MM 62), or ﬁendish tiger (MM 281), at  PLANAR TOLERANCE  Level: Cleric 4, druid 4, Elysium 2, ranger 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Duration: 1 hour/level You have barely time to bark out a few elder words of power, but then the pressure subsides, and you know you are safe long enough to complete your mission.  PLANE SHIFT, GREATER Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 8  You and the others link hands, and you concentrate on the forked copper rod. You rap the fork against your thigh and speak the words of the spell. You know where you’re going, and as the landscape around you fades, a new plane takes shape around you. This spell functions like plane shift (PH 262), except that if you have visited the desired location, the spell takes you to the precise location (rather than 5 to 500 miles distant).  CHAPTER 1  PLANAR EXCHANGE, GREATER  This spell functions like avoid planar effects (page 19), except as noted above.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like lesser planar exchange, except as noted here. You trade places with an avoral guardinal (MM 141), bone devil (MM 52), or babau demon (MM 40). The called creature has full access to all its abilities, with one exception: A demon or devil you conjure can’t summon other creatures. If the creature is slain, you take 3d6 points of damage and the spell ends.  your option, to your precise location. At the same instant, you are transported to that creature’s home plane, where you exist in stasis for the duration of the spell. To a casual observer, it appears that you have transformed into the called creature (though an onlooker who makes a DC 25 Spot check notices the slight gap in time between your disappearance and the creature’s appearance). If the called creature would not ﬁt in the place you occupied when you cast the spell, the spell fails. If the called creature is slain, you take 2d6 points of damage, the spell ends, and you are returned to your origin plane in the space last occupied by the called creature. A celestial creature (MM 31) called by this spell gains damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance equal to its HD +5; and a smite evil attack that provides a bonus equal to its HD on one damage roll. A ﬁendish creature (MM 107) called by this spell gains damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance equal to its HD +5; and a smite good attack that provides a bonus equal to its HD on one damage roll. You have full control over the creature’s actions and can perceive the environment around the called creature as if you were seeing through its eyes, hearing through its ears, and so on. While in stasis, you can’t take any actions other than to control the called creature or to dismiss the spell, nor can anything on the creature’s home plane affect you in any way. You also can’t perceive anything around your body’s location. When you dismiss the spell, or when the creature is slain, you appear in the creature’s location, and it is returned to its home plane. When you use a calling spell that calls a chaotic, evil, good, or lawful creature, it is a spell of that type.  PLANT BODY  Transmutation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level Radiating out from your hands, moss and ivy covers your ﬂesh until you resemble a shambling mound. You imbue yourself with powerful transformative magic, gaining some of the characteristics of the plant type. Any spell or effect that would affect plant creatures also affects you, for the duration of plant body. When subject to this spell, you are immune to extra damage from critical hits, mind-affecting spells and abilities, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, and polymorphing. Your ability scores, skills, and feats are unaffected (although your new form might make it difﬁcult or impossible for you to use certain skills or feats).  POISON THORNS Transmutation Level: Druid 5  Black,glisteningthornsemergefromyour skin,causingyounodamagebutendangering those who attack you in melee.  159  Illus. by L. Parillo  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Poison thorns protect a druid from a naga’s coils  This spell functions like thornskin (page 219), except as noted above, and a scratch from the thorns is sufﬁcient to deliver a dose of poison to your attacker. Any creature grappling you is exposed to the poison each round at the start of your turn. The poison from the thorns deals 1d4 points of Strength damage immediately and another 1d4 points of Strength damage 1 minute later. Each instance of damage can be negated by a successful Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your Wis modiﬁer). Material Component: A dried black rose.  POISON VINES  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 4 Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes In an instant you cause glistening green vines to spring up at your command.  160  This spell functions like vine mine (page 230), except that the vines you create  are poisonous (contact, 1d6 Dex/2d6 Dex). A successful Fortitude save is required only upon the ﬁrst entry into the spell’s area (and again 1 minute later); creatures don’t have to save each time they enter (or each round they remain within). You are immune to the poison of the vines you create, and you can select a number of other targets equal to your caster level to share this immunity.  PORTAL ALARM  Abjuration Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: 2 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You cast a tiny bell at the portal, and it rings as you ﬁnish the last gesture of the spell. With the completion of the spell, the bell vanishes in midair, but it continues to ring for a few moments more.  Portal alarm sounds a mental or audible alarm each time a creature of Tiny or larger size passes through the magic gate or portal the spell is cast upon. You decide at the time of casting whether the portal alarm will be mental or audible. Mental Alarm: A mental alarm alerts you (and only you) as long as you remain within 1 mile of the warded area and on the same plane. You notice a mental tremor that would awaken you from a normal sleep but does not otherwise disturb concentration (it would not interfere with spellcasting). A silence spell has no effect on a mental alarm. Audible Alarm: An audible portal alarm produces the sound of a hand bell, buzzer, or other similar repeating sound that can be heard clearly up to 60 feet away, and it pierces closed doors and extends onto other planes. The ringing can be heard faintly up to 180 feet away and lasts for 1 round. Creatures within the area of a silence spell cannot hear the ringing, and if the portal itself is within the area of a silence spell, no alarm is sounded. Ethereal and astral creatures trigger a portal alarm if they pass through the portal. You can set a portal alarm with a password, determined at the time of the casting, and this password can be discerned with the analyze portal spell (page 10). Those speaking the password before passing through the portal do not set off the alarm. Material Component: A tiny bell.  PORTAL ALARM, IMPROVED  Abjuration Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Duration: 8 hours/level (D) This spell functions like portal alarm, with the following additions. • You can designate the alarm set off by an improved portal alarm to be mental, audible, or both. • If a mental alarm is chosen, you receive a mental picture of all creatures that have passed through the portal and which direction they passed through. The mental image provides information as if you were  standing 10 feet away from the portal. • You can enable another creature to receive the mental alarm instead of yourself. You must touch the creature, which receives a Will saving throw to negate the effect, if applicable.  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You alter a magic gate or portal so it sends out a mental beacon for up to six creatures, including yourself if you choose. These individuals must be known to you but need not be present at the time of casting. Once you cast portal beacon, these creatures know the direction and distance to the targeted portal for the spell’s duration. Moving to a plane other than the two connected by the portal ends the spell for that creature but leaves it intact for others. You can have any number of portal beacons tuned to you without impairing other abilities or actions.  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Bycallingontheancientandtimelessmagical energies of the elements, you complete thespell.Immediatelyyourformbeginsto change,takingonaspectsoftheelementyou envisioned while casting the spell. When you cast this spell, choose an element (air, earth, fire, or water). You assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a Medium elemental of the chosen element (MM 96–100). Primal form also grants you the elemental  PRISMATIC EYE  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Magical eye Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by C. Franks  Mentally marking the appearance and location of the portal, you implant that knowledge into others, allowing them to be drawn to the portal like a loadstone to metal.  PRIMAL FORM  CHAPTER 1  PORTAL BEACON  Each round on your turn, every living creature within 10 feet of you gains 1 hit point per three caster levels (maximum 5). Creatures can’t exceed their full normal hit point totals as a result of this effect. Undead creatures take 2 points of damage per round. Characters with immunity to positive energy effects are not affected by this aura. A positive energy aura does not affect you.  subtype appropriate to the chosen element. You gain a +4 bonus on saving throws against mind-affecting spells and abilities. There is a 25% chance that critical hits and sneak attacks scored on you are negated, as if you were wearing armor with the light fortiﬁcation special ability (DMG 219). You cannot cast spells, and you lose any spell-like, supernatural, and extraordinary abilities of your own form. You gain additional abilities depending on the element you chose when you cast the spell: Air: Fly speed 20 feet (perfect). Earth: Damage reduction 5/—. Fire: 1d4 ﬁre damage, resistance to ﬁre 10, burn (MM 98). Water: Swim 90 feet, drench (MM 101). Your equipment melds into your new form and becomes nonfunctional.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Focus: A small leather pouch containing three brass bells.  Youspeaktheeldritchphrasesofpowerand an aura of white, shining, positive energy surrounds you.  Withapoppingsound,amoist,apple-sized eye with a rainbow-hued iris appears and sends a beam of colored light at the foe you designate.  POSITIVE ENERGY AURA  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The prismatic eye spell becomes more dangerous with multiple castings  161  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You create a visible orb that can produce ray effects duplicating the beams of a prismatic spray spell (PH 264). You can move the eye up to your speed as a move action, but it cannot go beyond the spell’s range. Starting in the round the eye appears, you can command it to ﬁre a ray (50-foot range) as a free action once per round. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with a ray to strike a target, but each ray uses a +6 bonus on attack rolls instead of your ranged attack bonus. A target struck by a ray suffers the effect of one beam of a prismatic spray spell (roll 1d8 to determine the effect, rerolling any result of 8), except that the save DC (if applicable) is 19. After a particular color of ray has been used, it is no longer available to the eye, and die rolls that indicate the same color are rerolled. Once all seven rays have been ﬁred, the eye remains until the spell’s duration expires. You can still move it, but it can ﬁre no more rays. The eye is a Fine object with AC 18 (+8 size) and 9 hit points. It uses your save bonuses for saving throws. Focus: A polished, rainbow-hued abalone shell.  PRISMATIC RAY  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes You feel within you, as the spell nears completion, various energies locked in a battle within your body. As nausea threatenstoovercomeyou,youcroakouttheﬁnal syllables of arcane power and point your hand. A single beam of brilliantly colored light then shoots from your outstretched hand. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. On a successful attack, a creature with 6 Hit Dice or fewer is blinded for 2d4 rounds by the prismatic ray in addition to suffering a randomly determined effect:  162  Color of 1d8 Beam Effect$ 1 Red 20 points ﬁre damage (Reflex half) 2 Orange 40 points acid damage (Reflex half) 3 Yellow 80 points electricity damage (Reflex half) 4 Green Poison (Kills; Fortitude partial, take 1d6 Con damage instead) 5 Blue Turned to stone (Fortitude negates) 6 Indigo Insane, as insanity spell (Will negates) 7 Violet Sent to another plane (Will negates) 8 — Two effects; roll twice more, ignoring any “8” results  PROBE THOUGHTS  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Mind 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Reachingoutwithyourthoughts,youbreak through your target’s mental defenses and reap answers to your desires. All of the subject’s memories and knowledge are accessible to you, ranging from memories deep below the surface to those still easily called to mind. You can learn the answer to one question per round, to the best of the subject’s knowledge. You pose the questions telepathically, and the answers to those questions are imparted directly to your mind. You and the subject do not need to speak the same language, though less intelligent creatures might yield up only appropriate visual images in answer to your questions. The subject is not aware that its mind is being probed, unless you wish to make it aware. If the subject moves beyond the range of the spell, the effect ends.  PROGRAMMED AMNESIA  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes As you ﬁnish the complicated procedure necessary to cast the spell, your target’s mind opens up to you like a book. You see the target’s memories like stories and know that you can rewrite them as a master bard rewrites the inferior works of his apprentices. You can selectively destroy, alter, or implant memories in the subject creature as you see ﬁt. Casting the spell gives you access to all of the subject’s thoughts and memories, allowing you to implement as many of the following speciﬁc effects as you like. MemoryErasure:Memoriespossessed by the subject can be erased, including knowledge of speciﬁc events, people, or places. You can erase up to one full week of memories from the subject’s mind. Memory Implant: You can create false memories in the subject’s mind as you see ﬁt. You can implant memories of being friends with a hated enemy, events that didn’t really take place, or betrayals by people the subject regards as friends. Negative Levels: You can bestow a number of negative levels equal to 1/2 the subject’s character level (rounding down, minimum 1st level) or less. This effect represents erasure of class knowledge and training. These negative levels never become permanent level loss, but they cannot be removed by spells such as restoration, instead returning at a rate of one level per day. Persona Rebuilding: By erasing the subject’s previous personality and implanting a false set of memories, you can build a new persona for the creature, altering its alignment, beliefs, values, and personality traits. (Some  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Swaddling your ally in a protective ﬁeld drawn by your hand like a blanket, you guard him against negative energy attacks.  PROTECTION FROM POSITIVE ENERGY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes A black seed of magic ﬂoats above your ﬁnger, and you implant it in the creature before you, guarding it against positive energy. The warded creature gains partial protection against positive energy effects. For as long as the spell lasts, it subtracts 10 from the hit point damage dealt by any positive energy effect (such as a cure spell) that adversely affects it. Positive energy effects that don’t deal hit point damage to the subject, such as turning attempts, affect the subject normally.  PROTÉGÉ  Transmutation Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: One creature with Intelligence 3 or higher Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You admonish your chosen subject even as you offer a supportive slap on the back. With that simple action, you complete the spell and see in your target a realization of its new abilities.  You brieﬂy grant some bard abilities to a creature of your choice. The subject of the spell can then function as a bard of one-half your current bard level with respect to bardic music and bardic knowledge. However, protégé imparts no spellcasting ability and does not grant access to spells not normally available to the subject. For Perform checks and bardic music prerequisites, the creature uses its own ranks in Perform or one-half of your ranks (modiﬁed by its own Charisma modiﬁer), whichever is better.  PUPPETEER  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  PROTECTION FROM NEGATIVE ENERGY  The warded creature gains partial protection against negative energy effects. For as long as the spell lasts, it subtracts 10 from the hit point damage dealt by any negative energy effect (such as an inﬂict spell) that adversely affects it. Negative energy effects that don’t deal hit point damage to the subject, such as an energy drain spell, affect the subject normally.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  class abilities might be affected by alignment changes.) ProgrammedTrigger:Youcanprogram the subject to delay the onset of any of the above effects until a speciﬁc event takes place, such as the receipt of a coded message, capture by enemies, or arrival at some destination. Similarly, you could specify some or all of the alterations you create in a subject to be removed by a speciﬁc event. The nature of programmed amnesia is such that a subject given new memories (whether willing or not) might be given cause to suspect that those memories are false, based on how complete your programming is. For example, a paladin subject to a persona rebuilding effect that changes her alignment to neutral loses her paladin abilities. Unless you impart a speciﬁc believable memory of why she changed alignment, the character will perceive this unexplained gap in her memory and might take steps (such as seeking a magical cure for her “amnesia”) that could negate the spell’s effect (see below). Generally, your subject must be either willing to undergo the spell or restrained in some way so that it cannot leave or interfere with the casting. Programmed amnesia cannot be dispelled, and so is normally permanent unless you care to specify events that will end the effect. Its effect can also be removed by a greater restoration, miracle, or wish spell. Material Component: A set of small crystal lenses set in gold loops worth 500 gp.  Incastingthis spell,you seewhatothers do not—stringsofsilverenergyrunningfrom your hands and feet to your target’s wrists andankles.Youwave,andshewavesback, inanawkward,resistingfashion.Youstart walking toward the edge of the cliff. . . . You force the subject to mimic your actions. The subject matches your motions exactly, though it takes a –4 penalty to Dexterity and Strength. Its movements look awkward, and its actions aren’t as effective as if it were actually doing them itself. You can try to make the subject commit a suicidal act, but it receives another Will save to break the spell. If that save is successful, the subject collapses, helpless and in a comatose state, for 1d4 rounds. Anyone observing the subject of this spell can determine that the subject’s actions are being controlled by making a DC 15 Sense Motive check (or DC 10 if the controlling bard is also visible). This spell doesn’t grant the subject extraordinary, supernatural, spell-like abilities, or spellcasting abilities, even if you have and use such abilities during the spell’s duration.  163  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  QUICK MARCH  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allies in a 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Uponcastingthisspell,yourfeetandthose of your allies glow with a yellow nimbus of light. Quick march increases your allies’ base land speed by 30 feet. (This adjustment is considered an enhancement bonus.) There is no effect on other modes of movement, such as burrow, climb, ﬂy, or swim. As with any effect that increases a creature’s speed, this spell affects maximum jumping distance.  QUICK POTION  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Flask of water touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You mutter the last of the spell’s words and wave your ﬁngers over the ﬂask. Coppery sparks drop from your ﬁngertips and suffuse the water with a deep rusty shade. As thesparksdissolvefully,youbegincasting your next spell. You transform the water in a ﬂask so that it is capable of storing a spell in the manner of a potion. On your next turn, you or another spellcaster can cast a spell into the water, transforming the water into a potion of the appropriate type. Only spells suitable for making potions can be used in this way.  QUILL BLAST  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 20 ft.  164  Area: 20-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Needle-sharp quills emerge from your skin as you begin casting this spell, then ﬂy outward in every direction when you complete the spell. Creatures within the spread of a quill blast are hit by one or more quills, depending on their size: Tiny or smaller, 4 quills; Small, 6 quills; Medium, 8 quills; Large, 10 quills; and Huge or larger, 12 quills. Small or larger creatures that make their saves are struck by half as many quills; Tiny or smaller creatures that make their saves avoid the quills completely. Each quill deals 1d6 points of damage and lodges itself into the creature it hits. Lodged quills impose a noncumulative –1 penalty on attack rolls, saves, and checks. All quills can be removed safely as a standard action with a DC 20 Heal check. Otherwise, removing the quills deals an extra 1d6 points of damage. Material Component: A porcupine quill.  QUILLFIRE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You evoke the power of nature, and the back of your hand bristles with a spikelike growth of quills. Your hand sprouts poisonous quills that you can use in melee or as a ranged attack. The quills deal 1d8 points of damage. They can be thrown (range increment 10 feet). The quills are poisonous (injury DC equal DC of quillﬁre, 1d6 Str/1d6 Str).  RADIANT ASSAULT  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 7, sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.- radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes Withoutstretchedhand,yougesturetoward theareawherethespellwillcomeintoeffect. Aninstantlaterablastofmulticoloredlight ﬁlls that area. This spell releases energy in the form of a multitude of rainbow-colored beams that erupt in every direction within the area designated by you. This kaleidoscopic burst of energy deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6), and all creatures within the burst are dazed for 1d6 rounds. Those that succeed on a Will save take only half normal damage and are dazzled for 1d6 rounds instead. Sightless creatures are unaffected by this spell. Focus: An eye from any outsider that has 4 or more Hit Dice.  RAGING FLAME  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 minute Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Hot, burning passion ﬁlls your soul as you completethespell.Youreleasethepassionate energy into the chosen area, causing ﬁres there to ﬂare with their own elemental desire to burn. This spell inﬂames existing ﬁre, giving it a passion to burn. All normal ﬁres within the affected area ﬂare up, burning twice as hot and twice as bright. The illumination radii of all nonmagical ﬁres double (so a torch casts bright illumination in a 40-foot radius), and all nonmagical ﬁres deal double damage (so a creature that catches on ﬁre takes 2d6 points of ﬁre damage per round). Fire that leaves the area remains affected by the spell. Fire affected by this spell burns out twice as quickly, so a torch that is the subject of a raging ﬂame spell burns  out in 30 minutes instead of the normal hour. Magical ﬁre in the area, such as from a produce ﬂame or ﬁreball spell, burns hotter, dealing +1 point of ﬁre damage per die. Raging ﬂame counters or dispels the effect of slow burn (page 192).  RAINBOW BEAM  Damage Type ﬁre acid electricity poison cold sonic force roll twice (ignore further results of 8)  Focus: A small clear gem or crystal prism worth at least 10 gp.  RAINBOW BLAST  Evocation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 120 ft. Area: 120-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes From your splayed ﬁngers shoots a beam of mixed energy and multihued lights. The beam burns and freezes, sizzles and screams. This spell is a wide-spectrum blast of radiant energy composed of all ﬁve  RAISE FROM THE DEEP  Transmutation [Water] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level); see text Target: One creature or object Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Waterroilsandfoamsastheshipwreckrises to the surface. Floating now effortlessly, it bobs up and down, never sinking more than an inch.  A rainbow blast spell strikes foes with every type of energy  Illus. by M. Phillippi  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If you hit, the subject is dazzled for 1 minute. The spell also deals 1d12 points of damage per three caster levels (maximum 5d12). A rainbow beam deals a random type of damage as determined by the following table. If two types of energy are indicated, rainbow beam deals half its damage from each type  Color red orange yellow green blue indigo violet multihued  CHAPTER 1  You ﬁre a ray of swirling, multihued light drawn from radiant energies. The light’s hues wind together but remain independent.  1d8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8  energy types. Rainbow blast deals 1d6 points of damage from each of the ﬁve energy types (acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic), for a total of 5d6 points of damage. Creatures apply resistance to energy separately for each type of damage. As you gain in levels, the damage die increases in size. At 7th level the spell deals 5d8 points of damage, at 9th level it deals 5d10 points of damage, and at 11th level it deals 5d12 points of damage—one die for each of the ﬁve energy types. Focus: A small clear gem or crystal prism worth at least 50 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation [Light] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  of energy indicated. Creatures apply energy resistance separately to each type of damage.  165  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The subject of this spell gains magical buoyancy and ﬂoats on the surface of the water for the duration of the spell, despite its weight or normal buoyancy. It cannot swim below the surface of the water. Creatures that must breathe water can still do so. If the subject is underwater at the time this spell is cast, it rises toward the surface at a speed of 150 feet. The magic of the spell prevents the subject from taking damage from the speed of the ascent. This spell is particularly effective at raising sunken ships from the deep. If you know the exact details of the shipwreck (its appearance, its name, the date of its creation, its history, and the circumstances of its sinking), the vertical distance between you and the subject is not a factor. When cast to raise a shipwreck, the spell brings up all surviving fragments of the ship, along with any loose objects that are in contact with the ship or enclosed inside it. The ship and its fragments remain on the surface of the ocean until the spell’s duration ends, at which point the ship sinks again if it has not been repaired. (Multiple consecutive castings of the spell might be needed to keep the ship aﬂoat long enough to be fully repaired.)  RAM’S MIGHT  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You complete the casting, and your hands tingle. Ridged, hornlike ripples appear over your knuckles, nails, and the backs of your hands. You gain a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength, and your unarmed attacks deal lethal instead of nonlethal damage. You are considered armed. The spell has no other effect; you can cast spells and manipulate objects normally.  RAPID BURROWING Transmutation Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S, DF  166  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Splayingyourﬁngerslikeamole’sforepaws completes the spell. With your touch, the target’sdiggingappendagesincreaseinsize and sharpness. This spell increases the touched creature’s burrow speed by 20 feet. It has no effect on other modes of movement, nor does it grant the subject a burrow speed or the ability to burrow through stone if the creature cannot already do so.  RAY OF CLUMSINESS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Acracklingrayleapsfromyouroutstretched hand.Thegreenrayseemsalmostsluggish in reaching its target, though it takes only an eyeblink to do so. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The energy of the ray stiffens the subject’s muscles and joints, making it more difﬁcult for the subject to move. The subject takes a penalty to Dexterity equal to 1d6+1 per two caster levels (maximum penalty 1d6+5, minimum Dexterity 1).  RAY OF DEANIMATION  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Target: One construct Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  A copper-red ray bursts from your outstretched hand. The sound of grinding gearsandbreakingmetalaccompaniesthe ray’s ﬂight. This ray interferes with magical animation, degenerating the magic bound within constructs and effectively causing damage. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The ray deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level to the subject (maximum 15d6).  RAY DEFLECTION  Abjuration Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Asthespelliscast,abriefshimmeringﬁeld appears around you. Small motes of silver ﬂoat within the ﬁeld. For the duration of the spell, you are protected against ranged touch attacks, including ray spells and ray attacks made by creatures. Any ray attack directed at you is automatically reﬂected harmlessly away. Focus: A glass prism.  RAY OF DIZZINESS  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You release a drab violet ray from your palm. The ray shoots toward your target in a spiraling corkscrew. You strike out at your enemy with a ray that causes intense feelings of vertigo. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A struck subject experiences strong feelings of vertigo and can take only a  move action or a standard action each round (but not both, and it cannot take a full-round action). Focus: A small top.  RAY OF ENTROPY  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If your attack is successful, the ray deals 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). The target must also make a Reﬂex save or catch ﬁre, taking 1d6 points of ﬁre damage each round until the ﬂames are put out (requiring a DC 15 Reﬂex save; see Catching on Fire, DMG 303). Focus: A small, polished glass lens.  RAY OF SICKNESS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./ 2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  Beware the wizard who masters rays  A cyan ray beams from your ﬁngertips. You shudder with cold as the ray leaves your hand. You launch a ray of numbing cold at your enemy. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If successful, the ray deals 1d6 points of cold damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). The target must also make a Reﬂex save or be frozen to the ground with its feet encased in ice. A frozen creature cannot move, receives no Dexterity bonus to AC, and incurs a –2 penalty on attack rolls. A frozen creature can free itself with a DC 18 Strength check or by dealing 15 points of damage to the ice. Material Component: Ice or a vial of melted mountain snow.  Illus. by S. Belledin  A burning ray shoots out at the target from your upturned palm. The sound of a crackling ﬁre follows the ray’s path.  CHAPTER 1  You direct a short ray at the eyes of a target. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. With a successful ranged touch attack, the subject is blinded for 1d4 rounds.  When you cast this spell, you unleash a ray of negative energy that consumes the life energy of the subject. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If your attack is successful against a living creature, the ray makes the subject weaker, slower, and less healthy. The subject takes a –4 penalty to Strength, Constitution, and Dexterity for the duration of the spell.  Evocation [Flame] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Evocation [Light] Level: Bard 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Yourpalmemitsarayoflight.Theraygives off a soft, continuous glow.  Youreleaseacracklingblack ray. The smell of decay ﬁlls the air.  RAY OF FLAME  RAY OF LIGHT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  RAY OF ICE  Holding your outstretched hand palm down,youﬁreasicklygreenray.Yourhand feelscoldandclammyforafewsecondsafter the ray ﬂies forth. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. If your ranged touch attack hits, the subject becomes sickened.  RAY OF STUPIDITY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes A bright yellow beam bursts from your extended ﬁngertips. The beam emits an  167  Illus. by C. Dien  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  “uh” sound, like someone trying to think of a word. This ray clouds the mind of your enemy, damaging its intellect. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A subject struck by the ray takes 1d4+1 points of Intelligence damage. If the target is a wizard, she might temporarily lose the ability to cast some or all of her spells if her Intelligence drops too low. Material Component: A miniature cone-shaped hat.  RAY OF WEAKNESS  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  REALITY MAELSTROM  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space, and 40-ft.-radius emanation centered on the same point; see text Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates, Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes A lightning strike and a tearing sound as loud as thunder ﬁlls the area as a hole in space opens. Wind rushes into the void,  and objects nearby lift into the air as everything is drawn inexorably toward the rip in reality. You tear a temporary hole in reality itself that sucks all loose material and living creatures into it, sending them to a random plane (see sidebar). Everything sucked into the reality maelstrom goes to the same plane. Reality maelstrom has a primary area and a secondary area. The primary area is the hole itself: a sphere with a 20-foot radius centered on the spell’s point of origin. Within that area, all unattended objects weighing 100 pounds or less are sucked into the maelstrom, as are all individuals who fail a Will saving throw.  A dark ray ﬂies forth from your hand. The air ﬁlls with the smell of blood. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The target of this ray feels weaker and takes a –2 penalty on attack rolls. Its speed is reduced by 10 feet.  RAZORFANGS  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You speak the words of this spell and your clawsshinewithlustrousyellowradiance, growing more slender and sharper as you watch. Choose one of your natural weapons that deals slashing or piercing damage (such as a bite or a single claw). That natural weapon’s threat range doubles (in most cases, becoming 19–20). The effect of this spell does not stack with any other effects that increase a weapon’s threat range.  168  Reality maelstrom creates a hole in the cosmology of the planes  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No  Bringing to your lips some of the most elemental words of arcane power, you feel stirring within you the spirits of ancient  This spell functions like dispel magic (PH 223), except that your caster level for your dispel check is a maximum of +20 instead of +10, and (as with greater dispel magic) you have a chance to dispel any effect that remove curse can remove, even if dispel magic can’t dispel that effect. When casting a targeted dispel or counterspell, you can choose to reave each spell you successfully dispel, stealing its power and effect for yourself. When making a targeted dispel, make a Spellcraft check (DC 25 + spell level) to identify the target spell or each ongoing spell currently in effect on the target creature or object. Each spell you dispel with a targeted dispel can be reaved if you so desire, and the spell’s effects are redirected to you, continuing as if cast on you by the original caster with no interruption to or extension of duration. Once you reave the spell, you identify it if you haven’t done so already (see below). If the subject was the caster and the spell is dismissible, you can dismiss it as if you had cast it yourself. Likewise, if the subject was the caster and the spell requires concentration, you must  concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect as if you had cast it yourself. You can still attempt to reave a spell you didn’t identify with your Spellcraft check, but doing so can be risky if you don’t know the speciﬁcs of the spell’s effect. For example, if you fail to identity an ongoing spell effect on an enemy character and choose to reave anyway, you might ﬁnd yourself under the inﬂuence of the dominate person effect that character was suffering from. Any spell resistance you might have has no effect against harmful spells you might inadvertently reave, but you get the same chance to save against those spell effects as the original target. If you choose to reave a spell you have successfully counterspelled with reaving dispel, you seize control of the spell after the enemy caster completes it, and you can redirect the spell to whatever targets or area you wish (including the original caster, if appropriate). Again, you must make a Spellcraft check (DC 25 + spell level) to identify the spell you intend to reave, but you are free to choose to redirect a spell whose effect, range, and area you don’t know. If the redirected spell’s correct casting conditions aren’t met (because you guess at an improper target or range, for example), the spell fails.  CHAPTER 1  REAVING DISPEL  mages as you prepare to absorb the spell energies you have targeted. Your body shakes uncontrollably, as if eagerly anticipating the power behind those spells.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  The rip also creates a windstorm of air that affects objects and creatures in the secondary area of the spell. The secondary area is all the space farther than 20 feet from the spell’s point of origin but not farther than 40 feet away. All unattended objects within the secondary area that weigh 50 pounds or less are drawn into the primary area of the maelstrom. Individuals within the secondary area must make a Reﬂex saving throw. Those who fail are sucked into the primary area and must then make a Will saving throw to avoid being drawn into the maelstrom. Individuals who succeed on either saving throw can move and attack as normal. A reality maelstrom is a one-way portal, so nothing ever emerges from the hole the spell makes. Material Component: A golden hoop no less than 1 inch across. RANDOM PLANAR DESTINATIONS  Spells such as prismatic spray, reality maelstrom, and scramble portal, and items such as an amulet of the planes and a staff of power can send an individual to a random plane. The list of available planes varies according to the cosmology you’ve chosen. An example using the D&D cosmology is presented in the next column. Transitive Planes such as the Ethereal Plane, the Astral Plane, and the Plane of Shadow should not be considered for such random destinations. The layer and exact location on the particular plane is up to the DM. Transportation to a random plane does not guarantee survival there, and individuals who risk such effects should be aware of the dangers. If an individual is someplace other than the Material Plane when randomly switching planes, simply replace the plane of origin’s entry on the table with the Material Plane. Thus, a staff of power broken on the Elemental Plane of Fire sends the wielder to the Material Plane if a 91 is rolled.  Random Planar Destinations d% Plane 01–05 Heroic Domains of Ysgard 06–10 Ever-Changing Chaos of Limbo 11–15 Windswept Depths of Pandemonium 16–20 Infinite Layers of the Abyss 21–25 Tarterian Depths of Carceri 26–30 Gray Waste of Hades 31–35 Bleak Eternity of Gehenna 36–40 Nine Hells of Baator 41–45 Infernal Battleﬁeld of Acheron 46–50 Clockwork Nirvana of Mechanus 51–55 Peaceable Kingdoms of Arcadia 56–60 Seven Mounting Heavens of Celestia 61–65 Twin Paradises of Bytopia 66–70 Blessed Fields of Elysium 71–75 Wilderness of the Beastlands 76–80 Olympian Glades of Arborea 81–89 Concordant Domain of the Outlands 90–91 Elemental Plane of Fire 92–93 Elemental Plane of Earth 94–95 Elemental Plane of Air 96–97 Elemental Plane of Water 98 Positive Energy Plane 99 Negative Energy Plane 100 Demiplane of DM’s choice 169  Reaving dispel can be used to cast an area dispel with the increased maximum caster level, but any magical effects so dispelled cannot be reaved.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  REBUKE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2, Hades 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You rap the switch in your hand and then sharply against your thigh, ﬁnishing the ﬁnal gesture that will bring discomfort to your foe. When the spell is cast, the subject is dazed for 1 round and shaken for the duration of the spell. Furthermore, a spellcaster targeted by rebuke must make a successful Concentration check (DC equal to the save DC for this spell + the level of the spell being cast) to cast spells while under its effect. Focus: A stick at least 1 foot long.  REBUKE, FINAL  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Saving Throw: Will partial You jab the stick into your side and twist it, causing yourself some discomfort but creating a killing pain in the target. This spell functions like rebuke, except that the target dies instantly if it fails its saving throw. A creature that survives this effect is dazed for 1 round.  REBUKE, GREATER  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 This spell functions like rebuke, except that the subject is cowering for 1d4 rounds instead of being dazed for 1 round.  170  REBUKING BREATH Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: 1 round  Your expel your breath weapon, and it is ﬁlled with dancing white sparks that swarm around your foes and freeze them with fear. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you imbue your breath weapon with negative energy that rebukes undead in its area. Undead within the area of your breath weapon that fail their saving throws against it cower as if in awe for 1 round.  RECIPROCAL GYRE  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature or object Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will half, then Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: No You ﬁnger the tiny loop of wire in your hands as you complete the spell. You manipulate the magical aura of the target, creatingadamagingfeedbackreaction,and the target explodes with white sparks. The subject takes 1d12 points of damage per functioning spell or spell-like ability currently affecting it (maximum 25d12). In addition, any creature so affected that fails its Will save must then succeed on a Fortitude save or be dazed for 1d6 rounds. Only spells speciﬁcally targeted on the creature in question can be used to create the backlash of a reciprocal gyre, so spells that affect an area can’t be used to deal reciprocal damage to creatures within their area. Likewise, persistent or continuous effects from magic items  can’t be used to deal reciprocal damage, but targeted spell effects can be. Material Component: A tiny closed loop of copper wire.  RECITATION  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 4, Puriﬁcation 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: All allies and foes within a 60-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Byrecitingasacredpassageordeclaration, you invoke your deity’s blessing upon yourself and your allies. The spell affects all allies within the spell’s area at the moment you cast it. Your allies gain a +2 luck bonus to AC, on attack rolls, and on saving throws, or a +3 luck bonus if they worship the same deity as you. Divine Focus: In addition to your holy symbol, this spell requires a sacred text as a divine focus.  RED TIDE  Evocation [Water] Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Asyoucompletethespell,asurging,frothingwaveofthick,redseawaterwashesover everything in the area. All creatures in the area of a red tide spell are immediately knocked prone and must make a Fortitude saving throw. A creature that makes its Fortitude save against a red tide is sickened for 1 minute. A creature that fails this saving throw is nauseated for 1 minute, and it takes 2d6 points of Strength damage. After 1 minute, the nausea ends but the creature must make a second Fortitude saving throw or take an additional 2d6  illusion. For example, a creature that touched you and realized that the tactile sensation did not match the visual one would be entitled to such a save. A creature with the scent ability automatically gets a Will save if you are within its scent range.  A metallic stretching sound, as if a thin sheet of metal were bowed then released, echoes forth from youroutstretchedhand.Youcansee for just an instant a glowing grid that deﬁnes the protected area of your spell.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Duration: 10 minutes/ level Thecreatureshrinksrapidly before your eyes. This spell functions like reduce person (PH 269), except as noted above.  You invoke the spell and, to your eyes, you are covered with a glittering net of sparks and spangles. To the eyes of the drow in the underground marketplace, you look like just another dark elf. Areﬂectivedisguisespellcausesanyintelligent creature viewing you to perceive you as the same species and gender as itself, provided that its size category is no more than one step different from your own. The spell changes perceptions of clothing, race, and gender. Reﬂective disguise does not give you any knowledge of the abilities or mannerisms of the reﬂected form, nor does it alter the perceived tactile (touch), audible (sound), or olfactory (smell) properties of you or your equipment. A creature that interacts with the glamer, beyond simply viewing it, gets a Will save to recognize it as an  Red tide bowls over, nauseates, and weakens foes  REFLECTIVE DISGUISE, MASS Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 12 hours (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  You cast the spell, and your allies all suddenlyappeartobemembersofthesame orc tribe you plan to inﬁltrate. This spell functions like reﬂective disguise, except you can change the appearance of other creatures as well. Affected creatures resume their normal appearances if slain. An unwilling target can negate the spell’s effect on itself by making a successful Will save or with spell resistance.  You create a special ward that prevents unauthorized spellcasters or creatures with spell-like abilities from entering an area. Any creature that has spells prepared, spell slots available for casting without preparation, or innate spell-like abilities must succeed on a Will save or be halted by an invisible barrier that prevents passage. The DC of the Will save increases by a number equal to the spell level of the highestlevel spell the creature has prepared or is capable of casting (so that a 10th-level sorcerer who hasn’t yet depleted his 5thlevel spell slots for the day adds 5 to the save DC). You can choose to designate a password or special condition (such as character race, alignment, possession of a token, or any other observable or detectable characteristic) by which spellcasting characters and creatures can enter the refusal-warded area. Creatures that have no spellcasting capability or spell-like abilities (including spellcasters who have used up their spell slots and creatures with spell trigger or spell completion magic items) can pass through the barrier with no difﬁculty. Spellcasters and creatures that have spell-like abilities and that are already within the area you protect when you create the ward are not compelled to leave or restricted in their movement within it (and spells and spell-like abilities can pass through the barrier in either direction with no difﬁculty). However, if such creatures  Illus. by J. Nelson  REFLECTIVE DISGUISE  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect and Area: Invisible ward that occupies two 10-ft. squares/ level (S) Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  REDUCE PERSON, GREATER  REFUSAL  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  points of Strength damage. Creatures that are immune to poison are immune to these effects of a red tide. Creatures with the ﬁre subtype take 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6), or half with a successful Reﬂex save. The tainted water evoked by this spell vanishes almost immediately, and any objects or creatures in the area do not emerge wet.  171  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  leave the area, they must succeed on saving throws as described above to return. Creatures attempting to use any teleportation spell or effect to enter the warded area make the normal saving throw. They are shunted harmlessly to the nearest safe space outside the warded area if they fail. Material Component: A pinch of dust from a wizard’s tomb.  REGAL PROCESSION  REJUVENATION COCOON  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing creature touched Duration: 2 rounds Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Paladin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Effect: One mount/level  Illus. by R. Spears  Youtossabitofhorsehairintotheair, and as it drifts toward the ground, an array of ﬁnely adorned mounts appears. This spell functions like mount (PH 256), except you can summon several mounts. Each comes with a bit and bridle, riding saddle, saddle blanket, ribbons, adornments, and a banner. You select the colors of the horses and the livery, either or both of which can include a heraldic or personal symbol.  Withasternwordofdisallowance,youcast thespell.Abarelyperceptiblehumsounds in the direction you indicate. A creature in the area must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or be pushed away from you to a distance of 5 feet per caster level. If the creature is pushed into a wall or similarly solid surface, it takes 1d6 points of damage for every 10 feet it was moved. Movement forced by this spell can take the creature beyond the spell’s range.  172  REJUVENATIVE CORPSE  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: One humanoid that died within the past week Duration: 24 hours or until discharged; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Hunger gnaws at your innards as you complete the spell. Your hands glow with black crackling energy,whichdischargesintothe corpse you touch. For a moment, the corpse glows with a similar blackness before fading.  REJECTION  Abjuration Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  The cocoon has hardness 10 and 10 hit points per caster level. If it is destroyed, the spell ends. Material Component: A cocoon of a butterﬂy.  Feasting on a rejuvenative corpse gives undead the power to heal wounds  You pass your hand over the body of your friend,drawingacocoonofglowingyellowgreen energy about him. When you cast the spell, the rejuvenation cocoon forms around the subject. One round after the cocoon forms, it heals the subject of 10 points of damage per caster level (maximum 150 hit points) and purges the subject of poison and disease. At the end of the second round, the rejuvenation cocoon dissipates and the subject emerges, able to move and act freely. The cocoon is made of force, but it is somewhat ﬂexible and responds to pressure from the inside of the cocoon. The subject can’t move from the space it is in while cocooned, however.  You charge a dead body with negative energy, giving it the ability to heal an undead creature that dines upon its ﬂesh. The corpse remains charged with this energy for up to 24 hours. If an undead creature eats a full meal of the corpse’s ﬂesh within this time (a humanlike undead creature, such as a ghoul, generally taking 10 minutes), the undead gains fast healing 1 upon completing its feast, which lasts for the next 5 minutes. This effect does not stack with any fast healing the undead has from other sources. This spell does not allow the undead to regrow or attach lost body parts. Eating the ﬂesh discharges the spell from the corpse. You can cast this spell multiple times on a corpse, allowing more than one undead to beneﬁt from eating it, though a single undead gorging itself on multiple “meals” does not gain any extra beneﬁt while the ﬁrst meal is in effect (the fast healing does not stack). A typical Medium corpse is usually enough for ten such meals, a Small  corpse ﬁve, Tiny two, and Diminutive one. A living creature that eats a charged corpse must succeed on a Fortitude saving throw or immediately contract ﬁlth fever (DMG 292; no incubation time). Creatures that are neither alive nor undead and eat the charged corpse are unaffected.  With a touch of a wax-covered ﬁnger to the subject, you inhale deeply and smell nothing. This spells hides the scent of the creature or object touched for the duration of the spell. The scent ability (MM 314) cannot detect a creature under the effect of a remove scent spell. It also negates the harmful effects of the noxious stench exuded by certain creatures, such as ghasts, for the duration of the spell. Material Component: A pinch of unscented candle wax.  RENEWAL PACT  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 7, Pact 7 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched Duration: Permanent until triggered Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Calling upon your deity to aid your ally, you bind a protective spell to your friend, leaving a tattoolike mark of your deity’s holy symbol on his skin. This spell remains dormant until the subject is subjected to one or more of the following adverse conditions:  REPAIR CRITICAL DAMAGE Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4  The smell of grease and the distant echo of clanking gears greet your senses as you complete this spell. Upon touching the intended construct, the grease smell and gear sounds disappear. Major dents and scratches disappear from the construct, as do cuts, tears, and abrasions. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 4d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +20).  REPAIR LIGHT DAMAGE Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Construct touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Asasculptormassagingaroughspotofclay into something less abrasive, your touch smooths over the dents and dings of the construct you touch. When laying your hand upon a construct that has at least 1 hit point remaining, you transmute its structure to repair the damage it has taken. The spell repairs 1d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +5).  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0  As if with the eye of an expert craftsman, your touch draws out a minor dent in the construct’s surface. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 1 point of damage to a construct.  REPAIR MODERATE DAMAGE  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Bard 1, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  REPAIR MINOR DAMAGE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  REMOVE SCENT  ability damage, blinded, confused, dazed, dazzled, deafened, diseased, exhausted, fatigued, feebleminded, insanity, nauseated, sickened, stunned, or poisoned. One round after the subject is affected by a condition that triggers the renewal pact, the subject receives a panacea spell (page 152) at a caster level equal to that of the caster of the renewal pact. A creature can be subject to only one renewal pact at a time. Casting renewal pact on a subject who already has an untriggered renewal pact voids the earlier pact. Material Component: A topaz worth at least 500 gp.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2  Your touch eliminates the wear and tear from the construct’s body. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 2d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10) to a construct.  REPAIR SERIOUS DAMAGE Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3  With a touch, you mold the battered construct’s form to be more like it was on its day of creation. This spell functions like repair light damage, except that you repair 3d8 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +15) to a construct.  REPLICATE CASTING  Transmutation [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round; see text Range: See text Effect: One spell or spell-like ability Duration: See text Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: See text The enemy mage raises her hands, and a cone of swirling, multicolored winds appears at her ﬁngertips. Then she laughs and says, “Can you do that?” You smile and reply, “I can now.”  173  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You duplicate the effect of any one spell or spell-like ability you have seen within the last round. This spell can duplicate only spells and spell-like abilities of 8th level or lower. This duplication functions like the ability of a wish spell to duplicate another spell, except that it is not limited by type of spell (divine or arcane) or by what school the effect is from. If the casting time of the spell you observed is greater than 1 round, the casting time of this spell is increased to the same. A duplicated spell or spell-like ability functions as if you had the appropriate spell prepared and were casting it yourself. If the spell or ability has an XP cost, you must pay that XP cost. If the spell has a costly material component, you must provide that component or pay an additional XP cost equal to the gold piece value of that component divided by 5.  RESIST ENERGY, MASS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart You call upon the protective energies of magicalpower,surroundingyoursubjects in temporarily visible ﬁelds of energy. Althoughtheﬁeldsfadefromview,youcan still just barely sense their existence. This spell functions like resist energy (PH 272), except that it affects all targeted creatures.  RESIST PLANAR ALIGNMENT Abjuration Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, Hades 2, Limbo 2, paladin 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  174  Youcantellthatyourtargetfeelstheoppression of the plane around you, the rank evil  oftheplace.Afewspokenphrases,backed by magical power, and that oppression seems to lift. This abjuration grants a creature limited protection from a plane’s alignment traits (DMG 149). When the subject visits a plane with an alignment trait, this spell grants it immunity to penalties on its Charisma-based checks that mildly aligned planes impose on visitors of opposed alignments. The Charisma-, Wisdom-, and Intelligencebased check penalties associated with strongly aligned planes are halved while the spell’s duration lasts.  Yourquickmovementsandrapidutterances release the spell’s energy, culminating in a ﬁnal cry that unleashes a tremendous bolt of sonic energy from your open hand. The bolt of sonic energy deals 1d4 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d4) to each creature within its area. In addition, a resonating bolt deals full damage to objects and can easily shatter or break interposing barriers. If the bolt destroys a barrier, it can continue beyond the barrier if its range permits; otherwise, it stops.  RESTORATION, MASS  Abjuration Level: Bard 4, cleric 4, druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Duration: 24 hours  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 7 Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  Justasyoutouchthespell’ssubject,afeeling of peace and watchful guardianship ﬁlls your being.  Hurling diamond dust into the air, you call out to your deity, and a sparkling aura brieﬂy surrounds those you wish to heal.  This spell functions like resistance (PH 272), except as noted here. You grant the subject a +3 resistance bonus on saves.  This spell functions like restoration (PH 272), except as noted above.  RESISTANCE, GREATER  RESISTANCE, SUPERIOR Abjuration Level: Bard 6, cleric 6, druid 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Duration: 24 hours  As you ﬁnish casting the spell, you feel imbued with the feeling that something greater than yourself is protecting you. Whenyoutouchyourintendedsubjectand release the spell, the feeling disappears. This spell functions like resistance (PH 272), except as noted here. You grant the subject a +6 resistance bonus on saves.  RESONATING BOLT  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 60 ft. Area: 60-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  RESURGENCE  Abjuration Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) By laying hands on your ally and saying a brief prayer, you convince a higher power to grant him a second chance. The subject of a resurgence spell can make a second attempt to save against an ongoing spell, spell-like ability, or supernatural ability, such as dominate person. If the subject of resurgence is affected by more than one ongoing magical effect, the subject chooses one of them to retry the save against. If the subject succeeds on the saving throw on the second attempt, the effect ends immediately. Resurgence never restores hit points or ability score damage, but it does eliminate any conditions such  as shaken, fatigued, or nauseated that were caused by a spell, spell-like ability, or supernatural ability. If a spell, spell-like ability, or supernatural ability doesn’t allow a save (such as power word stun), then resurgence won’t help the subject recover.  RESURGENCE, MASS  This spell functions like resurgence, except as noted here. The spell grants a second save attempt against a single spell or ability chosen by you. For instance, if three of your allies have been mind blasted by mind ﬂayers and two others have been turned into toads by baleful polymorph spells, you must choose to affect either the mind blast (granting three new save attempts) or the baleful polymorphs (granting two new save attempts).  REVEILLE  Necromancy [Language-Dependent] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: One recently dead creature Duration: 5 rounds Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You touch the body and intone a lament, calling out to the living memory of the creature.Tendrilsofmysticalenergysparkle around the creature’s lips, and it begins to speak. You cause a creature that has been dead for up to three days to reveal information about events that led up to its death. The corpse speaks tersely in its native language, using no more than a dozen words or so in a round. In the ﬁrst round, it describes the last thing it saw. In the second, it describes its dying wish. In the third, it describes  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Bard 6, blackguard 4, cleric 4, paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Dead ally touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourushtoyourfallencompanionamidthe chaosofthebattleandcryoutthewordsthat will bring her back for one last ﬁght. This spell brings a dead ally temporarily back to life. The subject can have been dead for up to 1 round per level. Your target functions as if a raise dead spell (PH 268) had been cast upon her, except that she does not lose a level and has half of her full normal hit points. She is alive (not undead) for the duration of the spell and can be healed normally, but dies as soon as the spell ends. While under the effect of this spell, the subject is not affected by spells that raise the dead. The subject gains a +1 morale bonus on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks against the creature that killed her.  REVERSE ARROWS  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged As you clasp the shell in one hand and the ball of sap in the other, a silver radiance ﬂecked with blue lines surrounds you. You pocket the items, but the radiance remains. This spell functions like protection from arrows (PH 266), except as noted here. If any projectile ﬁred from a ranged weapon that strikes you has all its damage negated by your damage  CHAPTER 1  Throwing out your hand and calling upon your deity for favor, you give your allies a chance to free themselves of the baleful magic.  REVENANCE  reduction (10/magic), the projectile is turned back upon the creature that ﬁred it. The attacker’s attack roll is used to determine if the reversed projectile strikes the attacker, but the damage is rerolled. If the attacker is also protected by a reverse arrows spell, it is possible for the projectile to bounce between both individuals until one of the spells is discharged from accumulated damage. Once this spell has prevented a total of 10 points of damage per caster level (maximum 100 points), it is discharged. Focus: A piece of shell from a tortoise and a ball of tree sap.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Abjuration Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, paladin 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  the attack that killed it. In the fourth, it tells who killed it. In the ﬁfth, it tells why it believes it was killed.  REVIVE OUTSIDER  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Dead outsider touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Sprinkling the components of its home plane over the body of the outsider, you chant and pass around the corpse three times. With the ﬁnal words of the spell, the outsider’s eyes open, alive once more. You restore life to a dead outsider, as with the raise dead spell (PH 268). You can restore to life any creature of the outsider type of up to your level in Hit Dice, and the creature can have been dead for any length of time. Material Components: A bit of soil, water, or other unworked, natural material from the outsider’s native plane, and a diamond worth at least 5,000 gp.  REVIVE UNDEAD  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Deathbound 5, sorcerer/ wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Target: Destroyed undead creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  175  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  176  Even fallen angels can be brought to life and light again with the revive outsider spell  Touching the corpse of the creature, you whisper to its departed spirit, calling it back—but not to life. Your restore animation to an undead creature destroyed by hit point loss (even a zombie or skeleton, which can’t normally be reanimated once destroyed). You can revive a destroyed undead creature that has been inactive for up to one day per caster level. In addition, the subject’s animating spirit must be free and willing to return. If the subject’s animating spirit is not willing to return, the spell does not work; therefore, subjects that want to revive receive no saving throw. Revive undead restores hit points to the subject up to a total of 1 hit point per Hit Die. The body of the undead to be revived must be whole. Otherwise, missing parts are still missing when the creature is reanimated. None of the dead creature’s equipment or possessions are affected in any way by this spell. An undead that has been destroyed by a turning effect can’t be revived by this spell. The subject of the spell loses one level or Hit Die (if it doesn’t have a character class level, it loses a HD) when  it is revived. This level loss cannot be repaired by any spell. If the subject is 1st level, it loses 2 points of Charisma instead. An undead that was destroyed with spells prepared has a 50% chance of losing any given spell upon being revived, in addition to losing spells for losing a level. A spellcasting undead creature that doesn’t prepare spells (such as a sorcerer) has a 50% chance of losing any given unused spell slot as if it had been used to cast a spell, in addition to losing spell slots for losing a level. Material Component: A black pearl worth at least 5,000 gp.  REVIVIFY  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Dead creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Thediamondsvaporizefromyourhandas you cast this spell, and the vapors they give off wrap around your fallen companion, dragging her soul back into her mortal form.  Revivify miraculously restores life to a recently deceased creature. However, the spell must be cast within 1 round of the victim’s death. Before the soul of the deceased has completely left the body, this spell halts its journey while repairing somewhat the damage to the body. This spell functions like raise dead (PH 268), except that the raised creature receives no level loss, no Constitution loss, and no loss of spells. The creature has –1 hit points (but is stable). MaterialComponent:Diamondsworth at least 1,000 gp.  RHINO’S RUSH  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1, ranger 1, Wrath 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round A violent fury consumes you. You seek nothing more than to charge at your enemies and bash in their heads. This spell allows you to propel yourself in a single deadly charge. The ﬁrst charge attack you make before the end  of the round deals double damage on a successful hit.  RIGHTEOUS AURA  You are bathed in an unearthly glow for the duration of the spell, as if a daylight spell (PH 216) had been cast on you. You get a +4 sacred bonus to Charisma. If you die, your body is converted into an explosive blast of energy in a 20-foot-radius burst centered where you fell, dealing 2d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6) to all evil creatures in the burst’s area. Good creatures in the area are healed by the same amount, and undead take double this damage. Spell resistance cannot prevent this damage, but a successful Reﬂex save reduces it to half. Your body is disintegrated, so you cannot be raised with a raise dead spell. Spells that do not require an intact body, such as true resurrection, can be used to bring you back to life as normal.  RIGHTEOUS FURY  Transmutation Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You pull a holy aura about you that glows a golden red. Summoning the power of your deity, you charge yourself with positive energy. This gives you 5 temporary hit points per caster level (maximum 50) and a +4 sacred bonus to Strength. These temporary hit points last for up to 1 hour.  Whenyoucastthisspell,youﬁreyourallies and companions with a divine madness or fury, greatly enhancing their combat ability. Allies gain one additional melee attack each round, at their highest attack bonus, when making a full attack. (This additional attack is not cumulative with other effects that grant extra attacks, such as a haste spell.) They also gain a +3 morale bonus on melee attack rolls and damage rolls. (This bonus on melee attack rolls does stack with the bonus provided by haste.)  RING OF BLADES  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level Asyoutwirlthesmalldaggerinyourhand, itslowlyfadesfromexistenceandisreplaced by dozens of larger blades swirling about you in a horizontal ring. This spell conjures a horizontal ring of swirling metal blades around you. The ring extends 5 feet from you, into all squares adjacent to your space, and it moves with you as you move. Each round, at the beginning of your turn, and also when you cast the spell, the blades deal 1d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10) to all creatures in the affected area. Spell resistance does not apply to the damage dealt, but a creature’s damage reduction does apply. The blades are treated as magic, silvered, and slashing  RUBY RAY OF REVERSAL  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One natural or magical hazard; see text Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Youinvokethepowersofgoodandlaw,and inresponsetoyourpleas,youglowwiththe golden radiance of the sun.  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 5, Puriﬁcation 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: Allies within a 30-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Material Component: A small dagger.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Abjuration [Good, Light] Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level  RIGHTEOUS WRATH OF THE FAITHFUL  From your ﬁngertips springs a thin line of bright red light to negate the hazard before you. Each version of this spell can target one of the hazards described below and “correct” it in the manner described. Unless speciﬁcally stated otherwise, this spell affects magical and mundane hazards of the indicated type equally. For example, a ruby ray of reversal can eliminate the webs of a monstrous spider or the effect of a web spell. • Any trap targeted by the ray is sprung. This version of the spell can have adverse effects on creatures standing within a trap’s area. You must be aware of a trap to cast ruby ray of reversal on it. • The spell unties knots and causes chains, manacles, and similar restraining devices to fall away. Entangle and similar magical effects are dispelled. Doors (or chests, drawers, cabinets, and so on) that are locked, barred, or under the effect of an arcane lock spell are opened. • A 5-foot-diameter hole is created in a wall of force, forcecage, or similar spell or effect. This function of the spell does not destroy the targeted effect, but creatures trapped by it might be able to wriggle free. • A creature that has been polymorphed, turned to stone, or otherwise transformed from its natural state is returned to its natural form. • A magic jar spell is dispelled if a ruby ray of reversal targets the crystal holding the caster’s soul.  177  • Webs, slime, grease, and other substances that would hamper movement are destroyed in a 20-foot-radius spread. Focus: A ruby worth at least 500 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  RUIN DELVER’S FORTUNE  Transmutation Level: Bard 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1d4 rounds  Youinvokethepowersofnature,andagreat fountainrisesupbeforeyou,sendingwaves in all directions. Cold water gushes in a great wave outward from the point you choose, violently spreading to the limits of the area. This wave makes a bull rush attempt against each creature in the affected area without provoking attacks of opportunity. The wave has a +15 bonus on the opposed Strength check. If the wave wins the opposed Strength check, the defender is moved 5  In desperate need, you cry out a word imbuedwithpower,grantingyou a bit of extra luck when you need it most.  Illus. by C. Frank  When the spell is cast, choose from one of the following effects. • Gain a luck bonus on Fortitude saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and immunity to poison. • Gain a luck bonus on Reﬂex saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and the evasion ability. • Gain a luck bonus on Will saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and immunity to fear effects. • Gain temporary hit points equal to 4d8 + your Cha modiﬁer. These hit points vanish at the end of the spell’s duration. You can cast this spell multiple times. Each time you do, choose a different beneﬁt.  RUSHING WATERS  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 15-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No  178  The rust ray spell can destroy a weapon in the blink of an eye  feet directly away from the spell’s point of origin, plus an additional 5 feet for every 5 points by which the wave’s check result exceeds that of the defender. Any creature moved 5 or more feet by rushing waters must succeed on a Reﬂex save or fall prone. The wave also drenches anything in its area and extinguishes any normal ﬁre as large as a bonﬁre.  RUST RAY  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray  Target: One nonmagical ferrous object or one ferrous creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None or Fortitude negates (object); see text Spell Resistance: No Youunleasharussetrayatametallicobject. The air around you smells of hot metal. This russet ray corrodes metal that it touches. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. It can effectively destroy any nonmagical iron or iron alloy object. Such objects struck by a rust ray take 2d6 points of damage +1 per two caster levels (maximum +10), ignoring hardness. You can also target a weapon being wielded or metal armor being worn. Metal armor affected by this ray takes normal damage from the spell and loses 1d4 points of Armor Class through corrosion. If an item is reduced to 0 hit points, it is destroyed. Ferrous creatures struck by the ray take the same damage as objects. Magic items can negate the effect with a successful Fortitude saving throw. Material Component: Rust particles or a piece of a rust monster.  SACRED HAVEN  Abjuration [Good] Level: Paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: You and allies in a 30-ft.radius burst centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A rosy glow passes from your hand and brieﬂy spreads around you. You and affected allies gain a +2 sacred bonus to Armor Class. In addition, while protected by this spell, an affected creature retains its Dexterity bonus to Armor Class when ﬂat-footed or when struck by an invisible attacker.  For the duration of the spell, you gain awareness of the health of all affected creatures, as with the status spell (PH 284), and you need not be able to touch the affected creatures to heal them with your lay on hands ability. Use of the lay on hands ability still requires a standard action, but it can be done at any range, as long as you and your target are on the same plane.  Youpressyourhandagainstthegroundand intonetheancientwords.Agreenradiance spreads from your hand, forming a ring of translucent jade ﬂames. “We’re safe,” you tell your allies, “for the moment.” You make an area safe from attacks. This spell’s beneﬁt functions much like that of the sanctuary spell (PH 274). The area of a safe clearing spell is immobile. Any creature attempting to strike or otherwise directly attack anyone within the safe clearing, or any creature attempting to enter the area, must make a Will save. Success means the creature can act normally and is not affected by this casting of the spell. Failure means it can’t attack anyone in the area or even enter the area for the duration of the spell. Those not attempting to attack creatures in the warded area remain unaffected. This spell does not prevent creatures in the warded area from being attacked or affected by area spells. A creature within the area that makes an attack is no longer protected by the spell, and can be targeted normally.  SAFETY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level  The recipient of this spell can ﬁnd the shortest, most direct direction to a place of safety, with safety being deﬁned as a location where the individual is not taking immediate damage from the environment, and immediate damage is not imminent. It does not provide the means for the subject to move in that direction. A safety spell points out the shortest distance out of a poisonous cloud, or the direction one should dig to reach the surface if entombed in earth. It does not function against the maze spell, because that spell deals no physical damage. Nor does the spell provide knowledge of or protection against the creatures that inhabit those safe places. In the D&D cosmology (DMG 150), safety has the following effects when cast on speciﬁc planes. Plane of Shadow: Shortest route out of darklands. Elemental Plane of Air: Nearest windproof shelter, shortest route out of smoke bank. Elemental Plane of Earth: Nearest air pocket or open cavern. Elemental Plane of Fire: Shortest route out of magma pools or other unusually hot places. Elemental Plane of Water: Nearest pocket of breathable air; shortest route out of hot spot, ice pocket, or red tide. Negative Energy Plane: Nearest doldrum area with the minor negative-dominant trait. Positive Energy Plane: Nearest edge zone with the minor positive-dominant trait. Limbo: Nearest area of stabilized limbo. Pandemonium: Nearest shelter from a windstorm. Carceri: Shortest route out of a Minethys sandstorm. Gehenna: Nearest ﬂat ledge, nearest shelter from Mungoth’s acidic snow.  CHAPTER 1  Abjuration Level: Ranger 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 30 ft. Area: 30-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  After an intonation and clasping of the subjectcreature,yougrantitknowledgeof where safety lies.  Nine Hells: Nearest shelter from ﬁreballs on Avernus, rockslides on Malbolge, or cold on Cania. Acheron: Nearest shelter from Ocanthus bladestorms. On planes you create yourself, safety might provide other information. This spell is mostly used in hostile environments, such as one of the Inner Planes, to locate the nearest pocket of habitable space. If safety is cast and then followed by a plane shift spell (PH 262), the plane shift sends the subject of safety to a place of relative safety on that plane. It is transported to a pocket of air on the Elemental Plane of Water, for example, or a cool spot on the Elemental Plane of Fire.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  SAFE CLEARING  Saving Throw: None or Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: No or Yes (harmless)  SALTRAY  Evocation Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes A thin shaft of whirling salt crystals lances out from your crooked ﬁnger to strike and shred your foe. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck by a saltray takes 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) and must make a Fortitude save or be stunned for 1 round.  SANCTUARY, MASS  Abjuration Level: Balance 5, cleric 5 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Youcastthisspellandyouareinfusedwith aclear,silveryaura.Youtoucheachofyour companions in turn, and they are infused with the aura as well. This spell functions like sanctuary (PH 274), except that it affects multiple creatures.  179  Illus.. by R. Spears  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SANDBLAST  Evocation Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 10 ft. Area: 10-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Whipping your hand in a wide arc, you spray sand from your ﬁngers in a powerful blast.  SCALE WEAKENING Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  Creatures in the area take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage. Any creature that fails its Reﬂex save is also stunned for 1 round. You are not harmed by the spell.  less than 0, nor does it have any effect on an enhancement bonus to natural armor (such as that granted by the barkskin spell). Material Component: A shed snakeskin.  SCATTERSPRAY  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: Six or more Diminutive or Fine objects, all within 1 ft. of each other, whose total weight does not exceed 25 lb. Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No With a single word and gesture, yousendsmall,unattendedobjects ﬂying about the room.  SARCOPHAGUS OF STONE  Conjuration (Creation) Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: No The ground quakes as native stone erupts from the ground. This sharply rising stone takes the form of a sarcophagus. This spell creates an airtight stone cofﬁn that forms around the target. The stone is 1 inch thick, has hardness 8, and requires 15 points of damage to break through. Decreasing its size does not change the thickness of the walls; the cofﬁn is always just large enough to hold the subject. This cofﬁn is sealed upon formation and completely impervious to air and gas. A creature trapped within a sarcophagus of stone has 1 hour worth of air, and after that time must hold its breath or begin to suffocate (DMG 304). A creature that has no need to breathe (such as a construct, elemental, or undead) needs not fear suffocation, but it remains trapped within the sarcophagus until it breaks free or is freed. A creature within the cofﬁn can attack the stone with a natural weapon or light melee weapon. A creature can  180  attempt a DC 26 Strength check to break free of the stone, and allies can also help to break the trapped creature free. Material Component: A fragment of a sarcophagus.  Encasing a foe in a sarcophagus of stone proves an effective—albeit grisly—tactic  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes As you cast this spell, the snakeskin vaporizes. A dull gray ray projects from your hand.Wheretheraystrikes,yourfoe’sskin seems brittle and more frail. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The subject’s natural armor bonus is reduced by 1 point per three caster levels (maximum reduction 5 points at 15th level). This spell can’t reduce a creature’s natural armor bonus to  You can point to a collection of little, unsecured items and cause them to ﬂy off in all directions simultaneously. The spray of items creates a burst with a 10-foot radius. If the items are fairly hard or sharp (such as stones, sling bullets, coins, or the like), creatures in the burst take 1d8 points of damage. A successful Reﬂex save negates this damage. Eggs, fruit, and other soft objects can be used, but the damage then dealt is nonlethal damage.  SCENT  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, ranger 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) At your touch, the creature inhales deeply, experiencing anew world of sensory input. You give the creature touched the scent ability (MM 314).  Material Component: A sprinkle of mustard and pepper.  SCINTILLATING SCALES  This spell transforms your natural armor bonus to Armor Class into a deﬂection bonus to your Armor Class. While your overall Armor Class might not change, the deﬂection bonus applies to melee touch attacks and ranged touch attacks, including incorporeal touch attacks. If you have no natural armor bonus, this spell has no effect.  SCINTILLATING SPHERE  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Youpinchthemarblebetweenyourﬁngers and intone the spell. It ﬂies from your ﬁngers,trailingasmellofozone,andgrows intoaballofmulticoloredsparksthatdetonate in a burst of spherical lightning. A scintillating sphere is a massive electrical discharge that deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) to every creature and unattended object within the area. Material Component: A glass marble.  SCORCH  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft.  Scorch deals 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels, to a maximum of 5d8 points of damage, to each target it hits. Focus: A red dragon’s scale.  SCOURGE  Necromancy Level: Pestilence 7 Components: V, S, F, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Targets: One living creature/level, no two of which are more than 50 ft. apart Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Picking out those you wish revenge upon, you cause their bodies to erupt in painful and debilitating blackened boils, magenta blotches,violetlesions,seepingabscesses,and malignant cysts. The target creatures are infected with a vile disease unless they succeed on a Fortitude save. Once it has infected a creature, the disease immediately deals 1d6 points of Strength and Dexterity damage, and it deals the same damage each subsequent day. A creature is allowed an additional saving throw each day to avoid that day’s damage. As with mummy rot (DMG 292), successful saves do not allow the creature to recover. The symptoms persist until the creature ﬁnds some magical means to remove the disease. The disease can be removed by ﬁrst casting break enchantment or remove curse on the subject (requiring a DC 20 caster level check for either spell), after which a remove disease, heal, or similar spell will cure the victim. Focus: A black whip or riding crop, which is cracked in the direction of the intended victims during the casting of the spell.  Transmutation [Chaotic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None (for portal) Spell Resistance: No You raise your hand and send a roiling ball of crackling, multicolored energy at the portal, knowing its chaotic power will give portal users a surprise.  You randomize the destination of one interplanar gate or portal for the duration of the spell. Anyone who passes through the portal from either side is sent to a random plane instead of the portal’s normal destination. All those who fail the save on the same round go to the same location on the same plane. Material Component: A cracked mirror.  CHAPTER 1  Youinvokethewordsofthisspell,andyour skin glistens and shimmers with a silvery protective aura that makes you shine.  A jet of roaring ﬂame bursts from your outstretchedhand,scorchinganycreature in its path.  SCRAMBLE PORTAL  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  Area: 30-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  SEAL PORTAL  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One interplanar gate or portal Duration: Permanent (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You cast a silver bar in the direction of the portal and it vanishes, becoming a semitranslucent net of silver magic that brieﬂy encases the portal before disappearing. You can permanently seal an interplanar gate or portal. The spell prevents any use of the portal, although seal portal can be dispelled by a dispel magic spell. A knock spell does not function on a sealed portal, but a chime of opening dispels seal portal if seal portal was cast by a spellcaster of lower than 15th level. Once a portal is opened, seal portal does not remain in effect and must be cast again. Material Component: A silver bar worth 50 gp.  181  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SECOND WIND  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous and 1 hour/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youfeelslightlywindedbutenergized,asif having just run a long distance but knowing you could run farther. When touching thespell’sintendedrecipient,yourbreathing returns to normal but you note the spell’s subject heaves a deep, refreshing breath. This spell removes fatigue from a subject and provides a +4 bonus on Constitution checks for the duration of the spell. If the subject creature is exhausted when you cast this spell, its condition is improved to fatigued.  SEEK ETERNAL REST  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level You invoke the greater powers and are infusedwithagreat,goldenglow,empowering you with holy glory. You improve your ability to turn undead. For the purpose of turning or destroying undead, you are treated as a cleric of your paladin level.  SENSE HERETIC  Divination Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Object touched Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  182  Holding the target item aloft, you quietly chant the last few words to cast the spell. Theitemimmediatelyﬂaresasoftbluecolor, which fades almost immediately.  This spell is usually cast on a weapon or a holy symbol. If an evil creature that has the ability to cast divine spells comes within 100 feet of the item, the item begins to glow with a faint blue radiance. You cannot tell where, or in which direction, the detected creature is, only that such a creature is within range. The spell can penetrate barriers, but 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt blocks it.  SENSORY DEPRIVATION  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief Spell Resistance: Yes Yourvisionblurs,andsoundsseemmufﬂed as you cast the spell. Upon completing it, you release the spell’s energy, freeing your senses from that which dampened them. Thetargetofyourspellglowsforaninstant with a black aura. Rather than creating an illusion of something, this spell creates an illusion of absolute nothingness. The spell effect surrounds the subject in a dark, clinging shadow that only it perceives, which blocks all auditory, olfactory, taste, and visual sensations. In addition, it blocks ﬁnely tuned senses of touch such as those that provide a creature with tremorsense. A subject that fails its save is blinded and deafened, and it gains no beneﬁt from blindsense, blindsight, scent, or tremorsense. The subject retains any telepathic or empathic links it might possess with other creatures while affected by the spell. Material Component: Black silk cloth tied like a blindfold.  SERENE VISAGE  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level  By casting this spell, you imbue yourself with an ephemeral quality that induces others to trust what you say. Simple illusions aid your attempts to be persuasive. You gain an insight bonus equal to one-half your caster level (maximum +10) on Bluff checks.  SERVANT HORDE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Invisible, mindless, shapeless servants Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you complete this spell, you sense a number of invisible entities form around you. This spell creates a number of unseen servants (PH 297) equal to 2d6 +1 per level (maximum +15). Material Component: A small stick to which many lengths of knotted thread are attached.  SHADOW BINDING  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 10-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes As the links of chain in your hand dissipate to feed the arcane energies of your spell, a multitudeofribbonlikeshadowsinstantaneouslyexplodesoutwardfromanindicated point nearby. Creatures in the area that fail a Will save are entangled and unable to move. Breaking free of a shadow binding requires a DC 20 Strength check or a DC 20 Escape Artist check, taken as a full-round action. Material Component: A few links of iron chain.  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Area: 1-ft.-diameter circle Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: No Spell Resistance: No With a ﬂourish, you open an invisible portal. Plunging your arm inside, you see your hand vanish as though it were invisible. You can temporarily stash small items on the Plane of Shadow (DMG 152) or permanently dispose of them there. This spell opens a small portal to the Plane of Shadow that is invisible on the Material Plane and appears as a small disk on the Plane of Shadow. You can reach into the Plane of Shadow through the portal created by shadow cache, but only small, nonliving objects can pass entirely through the hole. The cache can hold up to 30 cubic feet of material, or 250 pounds. You can recover objects placed in the portal throughout the duration of the spell, or by casting another shadow cache  later. A shadow cache remains stationary at the point where you create it. Items placed in a shadow cache can possibly be picked up by natives of the Plane of Shadow, and in any event are slowly moved by the morphic trait of the plane. For every 24 hours that passes, there is a 10% chance each day that objects placed on the Plane of Shadow with shadow cache are gone (either moved or taken). The spell cannot be cast on the Plane of Shadow itself, but only on planes coexistent with the Plane of Shadow.  SHADOW FORM  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Assassin 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Shadows rise from the ground to envelop you. The shadows easily move with you, guiding your steps and how to hold your body. While this spell is in effect, you gain a number of beneﬁts. The shadows wrapping your form grant you a +4  SHADOW HAND  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Medium shadowy hand Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  SHADOW CACHE  Illus. by L. Parillo  Shadow binding only entraps the weak-willed  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  competence bonus on Escape Artist, Hide, and Move Silently checks. Your shadowy form also provides you with concealment. This shadowy concealment is not negated by a see invisibility spell, but a true seeing spell counteracts the effect. Standing within the radius of a daylight spell or in bright natural sunlight temporarily suppresses the concealment effect. In addition, if you have 5 ranks in Escape Artist, you can attempt to slip through a solid object or barrier up to 5 feet thick with a DC 20 Escape Artist check, though doing this ends the spell as soon as the attempt is completed (regardless of success). If you have 10 ranks in Escape Artist, you can attempt to pass through an object or barrier up to 10 feet thick. If you have 15 ranks in Escape Artist, you can attempt to pass through a barrier composed of magical force (or similar magical obstacles). Material Component: A small piece of black cloth taken from a funeral shroud.  You intone the spell, and an enormous hand made out of thick gray fog ﬂoats in the air before you. You create a ﬂoating Medium hand made of shadow material. A shadow hand is an opaque gray color, 5 feet long, and 5 feet wide with its ﬁngers outstretched. It can grant total concealment against a single opponent you designate, carry materials as Tenser’s ﬂoating disk (PH 294), or point or gesture as a normal hand does. The hand has an AC of 18 (+6 natural, +2 deﬂection) and has half as many hit points as your full normal total. It can be damaged just as Bigby’s interposing hand (PH 204) can be, and it makes all saving throws as if it were you. Changing the hand’s task or target is a standard action, and it can move anywhere in range. If not given any  183  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  The shadow landscape spell brings a bit of the Plane of Shadow to the Material Plane  commands, the hand follows you at your speed, maintaining the same distance from you. The spell ends if the hand moves out of the spell’s range. If carrying items and commanded to do something else, the hand drops whatever it is holding to complete its task (you can order the hand to rid itself of items gently as a standard action). Unlike Tenser’s ﬂoating disk, it does not have to follow you at a ﬁxed distance—you direct where the hand goes.  SHADOW LANDSCAPE  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: One-mile-radius spread centered on a point in space Duration: 24 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  184  By infusing the nearby landscape with power stolen from the Plane of Shadow, you make the surrounding terrain a more savage, dangerous place. The spell’s exact effects vary with the terrain upon which it is cast. Desert: The spell transforms a desert into a place where no one goes willingly. The average temperature increases by 30 degrees, or decreases by 30 degrees if the desert is actually a tundra (see Cold Dangers and Heat Dangers, DMG 302–303). Sandstorms (or snowstorms if in a tundra) blow through a shadow landscape desert on an hourly basis. Forest: Forests augmented with a shadow landscape spell become frightening places where a canopy of rotting leaves blocks the sun and all the trees are strangely twisted. Spaces with light undergrowth have heavy undergrowth instead, and spaces covered with heavy undergrowth grasp at passersby as if an entangle spell (PH 227) had been cast on them (save DC equal to the shadow landscape’s DC).  Hill: Even gentle hills become more treacherous under the effect of a shadow landscape spell. Light undergrowth becomes heavy undergrowth in hill terrain, and slopes seem steeper than their elevation would indicate. It takes 2 squares of movement to move uphill on a gradual slope, and 4 squares to move uphill on a steep slope. Cliffs have frequent overhangs and are made of crumbling rock, requiring a DC 25 Climb check to ascend or descend. Marsh: Marshes seem swampier and more forbidding. Half the undergrowth spaces in the marsh become quicksand (DMG 88). Mountain: The mountains become places of jagged peaks, slippery slopes, and howling winds. Cliffs and chasms require a DC 25 Climb check to scale. Creatures who fail Climb checks or make loud noises have a 10% chance of starting an avalanche (DMG 90). Altitude effects are one category worse: areas lower than 5,000 feet are treated as the 5,000- to 15,000-foot category, and anything above 5,000 feet is treated as being above 15,000 feet.  Transmutation Level: Assassin 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Yourhandbecomesslightlytranslucentas youcompletethearcanegesturesofthespell. As you touch the intended recipient, your handappearssolidagain,whilethesubject’s ﬂesh takes on a dark, wispy, insubstantial appearance. The spell temporarily transposes some of the subject’s tissue with shadow-stuff, making the subject partially incorporeal. This partially incorporeal state does not allow the subject to pass through walls or other solid objects. Nonmagical physical attacks directed against the spell’s subject suffer a 50% miss chance. Magical attacks, such as supernatural and spell-like abilities, spells, and magic weapons, suffer a 20% miss chance.  SHADOW MASK  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) You draw raw energy from the Plane of Shadow to obscure your face. You cause a mask of shadows to form around your face. It does not impede your vision, cannot be physically removed, completely hides your features, and protects you against certain attacks. You receive a +4 bonus on saving throws against light or darkness spells and any spells that rely on bright light for damaging effects, such as the ﬂare spell or the ﬁreworks effect of pyrotechnics. You also gain a 50% chance each round to avoid having to make a saving throw against gaze attacks, just as if you averted your  eyes. If you avert your eyes while using shadow mask, you get to check twice to see if you avoid having to make the saving throw. When the spell’s duration ends, the shadow mask fades over the course of 1d4 rounds (rather than immediately), giving you time to keep your face hidden by other means. A successful dispel magic cast against a shadow mask effectively ends the spell and causes the same slow fading. Material Component: A mask of black cloth.  SHADOW RADIANCE  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: Yes  CHAPTER 1  In addition to terrain-speciﬁc effects, a shadow landscape spell worsens the weather within the spell’s area. When rolling random weather (DMG 94), roll twice and take the higher result. In plains terrain, roll three times and take the highest result. This effect does not apply underground. You don’t suffer the terrain-speciﬁc effects (entangling terrain, hindrances to movement, altitude effects, higher Climb DCs, and so on) of a shadow landscape you created. When you cast shadow landscape, you can designate one creature per four caster levels as a designated traveler. Creatures so designated don’t suffer the terrain-speciﬁc effects of the spell, but they’re still subject to the bad weather. You can also designate one or more animals, plants, or magical beasts native to the spell’s area as shadow guardians of the landscape. You can designate 1 HD of creature per caster level, split up however you like. For example, a 20th-level druid could designate two treants (7 HD each) and a dire wolf (6 HD) as shadow guardians. As long as the designated guardians remain within the spell’s area, they have a friendly attitude toward you and the travelers you have designated, and they also gain the following special qualities: resistance to cold 10, darkvision out to 60 feet, damage reduction 5/magic, evasion, and lowlight vision. If the creature already has one or more of these special qualities, use the better value.  SHADOW PHASE  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Plain: Only natural grasslands change as a result of shadow landscape, but they become wide-open spaces with stands of thick bushes where thunderstorms and tornados are frequent. Half the spaces with undergrowth (light or heavy) grasp at passersby as if an entangle spell (PH 227) had been cast on them (save DC equal to the shadow landscape’s DC). Underground: Ordinary dungeons aren’t affected by shadow landscape, but naturally occurring caverns are. Natural stone ﬂoors take 4 squares of movement per space to enter. Stalagmites cover 10% of the available ﬂoor space.  Whisperingtheﬁnalsyllableofthecomplicatedformula,youcastthespell.Instantly, a blast of bright light ﬁlls the targeted area. From your vantage point, the spell’s light glows like a torch, although you note some creatures turn away from it as if it were a blinding radiance. This spell creates an intensifying illusion of bright light that affects all creatures within the area (except those that are sightless or blinded). Viewers that fail their saving throws see a burst of bright light on the ﬁrst round and become blinded for 1 round. On subsequent rounds for the rest of the spell’s duration, the affected creatures continue to perceive a bright light. If they take penalties in bright illumination, they take them for the duration of their exposure to this light. Additionally, they are dazzled while in the area of the spell. Those who escape the area of a shadow radiance spell completely recover within 1 round. Those who make their saves and those outside the initial burst see only the equivalent of torchlight emanating from the center of the area. Material Component: A ﬂame at least the size of a torch.  185  SHADOW SPRAY  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 5-ft.-radius burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes As you ﬁnish casting this spell, ribbonlike shadows burst outward from the midst of your foes. You cause a multitude of ribbonlike shadows to instantaneously explode outward from the point of origin. Creatures in the area take 4 points of Strength damage and are dazed for 1 round. Material Component: A handful of black ribbons.  SHADOW WELL  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You spit out the words of the spell, and the shadowofyourfoedarkens,becomingasolid blackpit.Youropponentpinwheelsitsarms as it topples backward into the darkness. You cause the target’s shadow to become a temporary gateway to a pocket realm within the Plane of Shadow. The target must make a Will save or be pulled into the gateway. Inside the pocket realm, the creature sees a deserted, gloomy duplicate of the real world, while shadowy phantasms stalk and taunt it without causing actual harm. Each round, the creature can attempt another Will save to return from the shadow well. Otherwise, the subject returns to the real world when the spell’s duration expires. Being trapped in a shadow well can be terrifying; upon returning to the real world, the subject must succeed on another Will save or be frightened for 1d4 rounds.  186  Upon leaving the pocket realm, the subject reappears in the spot it had been in when the shadow well spell was cast. If this spot is ﬁlled with a solid object, the subject appears in the nearest adjacent empty space. Spells and abilities that move a creature within a plane, such as teleport and dimension door, do not help a creature escape a shadow well spell, although a plane shift spell allows it to ﬂee to another plane as normal. The target might still become frightened upon leaving.  SHADOWBLAST  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 4, druid 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Lightﬂashesbrightandwhiteforaninstant in the area of this spell, dispersing portals to the Plane of Shadow and stunning the unnatural creatures that fear the light. Natives of the Plane of Shadow caught in a shadowblast are stunned for 1d6 rounds if they fail a Fortitude saving throw. Shadow natives that are also undead or vulnerable to light take an additional 2d10 points of damage if they fail a second Fortitude save. Creatures that fail either Fortitude save cannot use spell-like or supernatural abilities to open any portal to the Plane of Shadow for 3d6 minutes. Shadowblast closes all portals, gates, and other openings to the Plane of Shadow in its area. Creatures on the other side of a portal are unaffected by shadowblast. Material Component: A handful of grave dirt, squeezed tightly and ﬂung.  SHADOWFADE  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One 10-ft. portal to the Plane of Shadow Duration: 1 minute/level  Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Summoningtomindadarkreﬂectionofthe world around you, you inscribe a doorway into the air with your hand, opening a portal to the Plane of Shadow. You open a 10-foot-diameter portal onto the Plane of Shadow, allowing you and creatures you designate within range to pass into that area. This does not grant you the ability to open another such portal automatically, so the spell is often used as a temporary hiding place or a method of gaining access to the Plane of Shadow. The portal remains for the duration of the spell, and other creatures can pass through it in either direction if they make a Will save. The portal is invisible from the Material Plane and looks like a white hole on the Plane of Shadow. You must be in a region of heavy shadows to cast shadowfade. The spell can be cast only on a plane coexistent with the Plane of Shadow (DMG 152), and it cannot be cast on the Plane of Shadow itself.  SHADOWY GRAPPLER  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youfeelaspectralforceformnearyou,asif someintangibleshadowbeingstoodnearby. Uponchoosingthetargetofyourspell,you sense the shadowy force depart from your side, moving as fast as thought toward the creatureyoudesignatedasyourtarget.You see the target creature move as if attacked by an unseen foe. Upon casting this spell, you create a shadowy force that automatically grabs the target (PH 156). The shadowy force immediately attempts to establish a hold on the target with a grapple check bonus equal to the DC of this spell. If the target succeeds on its saving throw, the grapple check bonus of the shadowy grappler is cut in half. For example, a sorcerer with a 16 Charisma who casts  radius. A successful Reﬂex save halves the damage. Each round at the beginning of your turn, creatures in the area take an additional 3d6 points of force damage. You can use a free action to suppress the storm for that round. Material Component: A small shard of clear glass or crystal.  Immediately upon completion of this spell, and once per round thereafter, you can cause minuscule shards of magical force to explode out in a 20foot-radius burst from the point of origin. The storm deals 3d6 points of force damage to all creatures within the  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You cast this spell, and your jaws glow with yellow, eldritch power, your muscles grow more powerful,andyourteeth become sharper.  Shard storm harms corporeal and incorporeal foes alike  SHARE HUSK  Divination Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by R. Horsley  Tossingtheshardfromyourgrasp,youcomplete the spell. An instant later, translucent shards of arcane energy blast the area you designated. In addition to deadly shards, the area ﬁlls with the chiming sound of shattering glass.  You sense through an animal’s senses, seeing through its eyes and hearing through its ears. While doing so, you use either your Listen or Spot modiﬁers or the animal’s, whichever is better. This spell gives you no special ability to understand what you sense. You can switch your perceptions between the animal’s and your own on your turn as a free action. You and the animal must be on the same plane for the spell to function. Material Component: An edible treat that would appeal to the animal (vegetable or meat).  SHARPTOOTH  SHARD STORM Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./ level) Effect: One or more 20-ft.-radius bursts of piercing force Duration: 1 round/ level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  As the bit of dried food vanishes from your hand, you gain a wolf’s-eye view of the world—and a wolf’s-nose view as well.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  this spell creates a shadowy grappler with a grapple check bonus of +19 if the target fails its save and +9 if the target makes its save. Every round on your turn, the shadowy grappler makes a grapple check against the target. Once it has a hold, the shadowy force attempts to pin the target on the following round. If the grappler establishes a pin, it uses the option to prevent the target from speaking. The grappler always attempts to maintain a grapple or work toward a pin. A shadowy grappler occupies the same square as the target and moves with the target for as long as the spell lasts. Other creatures cannot join the grapple, either to assist the target or the grappler. Material Component: A dried squid tentacle.  Choose one of your natural weapons (or your unarmed strike if you have no natural weapons). For the duration of the spell, that method of attack deals damage as though you were one size category larger than your actual size. This spell does not stack with itself.  SHATTERFLOOR  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 15-ft.-radius spread Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes  187  Illus. by D. Martin  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  188  You strike the bell with the hammer and evoke a loud thrumming vibration. It quickly builds to a painful crescendo, then fades.Initswakeitleavesacircleofcrushed stone and rubble.  You hold your arms aloft and implore the power you venerate. Your comrades are bathedinasilverlight,andovertheirhearts appearsthesymbolofyourgod,showingthe deity’s protection.  Creatures and objects in the area take 1d4 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d4), and can make a saving throw to take half damage. If the ﬂoor of the area is made of stone, wood, ice, or material with hardness less than those, the ﬂoor is pulverized, resulting in an area of difﬁcult terrain composed of soft dust, wood fragments, or loose crushed ice, as appropriate. Focus: A miniature hammer and bell worth at least 10 gp.  This spell functions like shield of faith (PH 278), except that it affects multiple allies at a distance.  SHELTERED VITALITY  Abjuration Level: Cleric 4, druid 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  The touched shield or buckler grants its wielder a +1 sacred bonus to Armor Class and on Reﬂex saves, +1 per ﬁve caster levels (maximum +5 at 20th level). The bonus applies only when the shield is worn or carried normally (but not, for instance, if it is slung over the shoulder).  SHIELDBEARER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Shield touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Afeelingofprotectivenessand guardianship ﬁlls you as you complete the spell. Touching the target shield, you point to the creature it is meant to protect and watch as the shield rises intheairandﬂoats gently toward the indicated creature.  A shieldbearer spell allows you to enchant one shield so that it hovers near and attempts to protect one creature of your choice. The spell’s recipient is chosen at the time of casting and cannot be changed. The enchanted shield remains within 1 foot of the creature The shieldbearer spell can prove better than the shield spell for the duration of the spell. Pressing your hand to the The shield’s subject is then granted a creature’s chest, you utter a low chant, and SHIELD OF WARDING shield bonus to AC as if it was wearAbjuration [Good] a warm glow passes from your hand into ing the shield. The spell permits the the subject. Level: Cleric 3, paladin 2 enchanted shield’s subject to use a Components: V, S two-handed weapon or a weapon in The subject gains immunity to fatigue, Casting Time: 1 standard action each hand and still beneﬁt from the exhaustion, and ability damage or abilRange: Touch shield’s effect. ity drain (regardless of the source). Target: One shield or buckler Shield bonuses from multiple touched sources, including multiple castings Duration: 1 minute/level SHIELD OF FAITH, of this spell, do not stack. Saving Throw: Will negates (object, MASS harmless) Abjuration SHIFTING PATHS Spell Resistance: No Illusion (Glamer) Level: Cleric 4 You press your palm against the shield and Level: Druid 7, sorcerer/wizard 8 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) speakthewordsofpower.Asilverradiance, Components: V, S Targets: One creature/level, no two in the shape of your holy symbol spreads Casting Time: 10 minutes of which are more than 30 ft. apart over the shield. Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 1-mile radius + 1 mile/level  Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will disbelief (if interacted with) Spell Resistance: Yes  SHOCK AND AWE  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Assassin 1, bard 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart. Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Upon completing this spell, you feel a nagging compulsion to divert your attention from your enemies. Shaking off the feeling, you note with satisfaction that your targetedenemiesseemevenmoredistracted than you. This spell distracts its targets, preventing them from reacting with the deftness they might otherwise possess. Only effective when cast in the surprise round of combat and against  Evocation [Fire] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Yousnapyourﬁngers,andasmallexplosion ofblacksmokeresults.Nearby,oneofyour foes bursts into ﬂames. This spell causes a creature to take 2d6 points of ﬁre damage in each round of the spell’s duration. The shroud of ﬂame around the creature sheds bright illumination out to 40 feet and negates any concealment the creature might have. Immersing the subject creature in a nonﬂammable liquid ends the spell. Material Component: A pinch of saltpeter, a small piece of phosphorus, and a scrap of lace cloth or a spiderweb.  SHROUD OF UNDEATH Necromancy Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  You are bathed with a dappled white light. Whereitstrikesyourbody,yourﬂeshgrows momentarilypaleandancient,thenreturns to normal. You shroud yourself with invisible negative energy so that nonintelligent undead creatures perceive you as a fellow undead, ignoring you. Your appearance does not change, and while intelligent undead do not immediately recognize you as alive, they are likely to question whether you are actually undead. If used in conjunction with a disguise or illusion to appear undead,  CHAPTER 1  This spell simultaneously hides a path or road speciﬁed by you, while simultaneously creating an illusory path. The illusory path starts at a point chosen by you within the range of the spell. It continues in the direction you indicate, to the limit of the spell’s area, where it ends abruptly. The illusory path avoids obstacles and provides no bridges, stairs, ladders, ramps, or other methods of traversing such obstacles. There is no way to force the illusory path to lead over a cliff or across a river more than 4 feet deep. Those who fail their Will saves struggle along the illusory path. If vegetation or rough terrain slows their progress, they believe the path is sloping enough to justify the reduced speed. Those who succeed on their Will saves see both paths, but the illusory path is shadowy and obviously unreal.  SHROUD OF FLAME  this spell gives you a +5 bonus on your Disguise check. When you are affected by this spell, inﬂict spells heal you and cure spells hurt you. You are treated as if you were undead for the purpose of all spells and effects that speciﬁcally affect undead creatures. A successful turning or rebuking attempt against you (treating you as an undead of your Hit Dice) ends this spell but does not otherwise affect you. If you attack an undead creature while this spell is in effect, the spell immediately ends. Material Component: Dust or bone fragments from any destroyed undead creature.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  As if a massive cloth were sweeping it away, the path before you becomes hidden in shadows and false underbrush. At the same moment, a new path appears from the point you designate, wandering off in a different direction.  ﬂat-footed creatures, this spell causes those it affects to take a –10 penalty on their next initiative check. Targets that cannot be caught ﬂat-footed (such as a rogue with uncanny dodge) cannot be affected by this spell.  SIGN  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Cleric 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level or until discharged The tea leaves burst into ﬂames between yourﬁngers,andforabriefmomentyousee the future in the billowing smoke. You get a +4 bonus on your next initiative check. Material Component: A small piece of dried goat intestine or some tea leaves.  SIGN OF SEALING  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One door, chest, or other opening up to 30 sq. ft./level Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: No While pointing at the target, you trace the lines of a complicated sigil that visually appears where it is to seal. The sigil glows with latent magical energy. You seal a door, chest, or similar closure with a prominent magical sigil that  189  Illus. by B. Hagan  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  bars entry and prevents opening. A door or object protected by this spell can be opened only by breaking (add 10 to the normal break DC) or by the use of knock or dispel magic. If the door or object is forced open by any means (magical or physical), the sign of sealing deals 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 10d4) in a 30-foot radius (Reﬂex half). A knock spell doesn’t negate or automatically bypass a sign of sealing, but will suppress the sign for 10 minutes on a successful caster level check (DC 11 + the caster level of the sign’s creator). A sign of sealing is a magic trap that can be disarmed with a DC 28 Disable Device check. You can pass your own sign safely, and it remains set behind you. Material Component: A crushed emerald worth 100 gp.  SILENT PORTAL  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Assassin 1, sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One portal  In the case of magic or even intelligent portals, spell resistance and a Will save (DC 10 + caster’s ability modiﬁer + other modiﬁers as appropriate) apply.  SILVERBEARD  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You evokethegreater powers of good, and your beard stiffens, turning metallic and reachinghalfwaydownyour chest, giving you greater protection. Your beard grows and turns to pure and magically hardened silver, providing you with a +2 sacred bonus to AC. If you do not have a beard, you grow one for the duration of this spell (even if you are a creature that cannot normally grow a beard, such as an elf or a female human). You get a +2 circumstance bonus on Diplomacy checks against dwarves.  SIGN OF SEALING, GREATER  Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Casting Time: 10 minutes Target: One door, chest, or other opening or open space up to 30 sq. ft./level This spell functions like sign of sealing, except that it can also be used to seal an open space (such as a corridor or an archway), creating a magical barrier of force that repels any creature attempting to pass. In addition, doors and objects protected by a greater sign of sealing are strengthened, increasing their hardness by 10 and granting them an extra 5 hit points per caster level. Any object protected by a greater sign of sealing is treated as a magic item for the purpose of making saving throws and gains a +4 resistance bonus on saving throws. If its seal is broken, a greater sign of sealing deals 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 20d6) in a 40-foot radius (Reﬂex half). A greater sign of sealing cannot be passed with a knock spell, but it can be dispelled (DC 15 + the caster level of  190  the sign’s creator). It can be disarmed with a DC 31 Disable Device check. Material Component: A crushed emerald worth at least 500 gp.  The sink spell defeats even the best swimmer  Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Thedoorsqueaksslightlyasyouforceit.You pause and wave your ﬁnger in a pattern along the opening and it silences. This simple cantrip negates the sound of opening and closing a single portal (door, window, gate, drawer, chest lid, or the like). Even the squeakiest door opens without a sound when under the effect of this spell. Silent portal covers only the normal means of opening and closing the targeted portal. Breaking a window or kicking in a door still makes noise, but opening a door that is loosely hanging by its hinges does not (since this is the normal way a door would be opened). Portals composed of magical energy are not affected by this spell.  SINK  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/3 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Casting this spell makes the water around the spell’s targets roil. Each target begins struggling against the water, as if trying hard merely to stay aﬂoat. When this spell is cast, it causes the targets, which must be currently in water or another liquid, to sink. Each subject descends 100 feet down into the liquid (or to the bottom, if the liquid is  not deep enough). Affected creatures can then swim up normally. Once on the bottom, a creature must still make a Swim check to move, or else it can move along the bottom at one-quarter its land speed.  SIRINE’S GRACE  For the duration of this spell, you gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Charisma and Dexterity, a deﬂection bonus to AC equal to your Charisma modiﬁer, and a +8 bonus on Perform checks. You also gain a swim speed of 60 feet and the ability to breathe water. You can move and attack normally while underwater, even with slashing or bludgeoning weapons. Material Component: A shard of mirror.  SKELETAL GUARD  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One or more ﬁngerbones Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Shaking the ﬁngerbones in your hand like dice,youcoattheminshadowyenergy.As youcastthemtothegroundtocompletethe spell, animate skeletons spring up where you threw the bones. You create a number of loyal skeletons from ﬁngerbones. Treat all skeletons as human warrior skeletons (MM 226), except that each one has turn resistance equal to your caster level – 1. You can create one skeleton per caster level. These skeletons count toward the number of Hit Dice of undead you can  Necromancy Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One humanoid skull Duration: Permanent Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No You lift the skull into the air and it ﬂoats gentlyoutofyourgrasp,itseyesocketslocked on a distant point. The skull affected by a skull watch spell ﬂoats gently 5 feet off the ground, facing a direction you choose. It monitors an area 20 feet wide by 90 feet long, though walls and other opaque barriers can curtail this area. If any Tiny or larger living creature enters the area guarded by the skull, it emits a piercing shriek that can be heard up to a quarter mile away. Every creature within 60 feet of the skull when it shrieks must make a Fortitude save or be deafened for 1d6 rounds. Whether or not you can hear this audible alarm, you instantly become aware that the effect has been triggered, provided you are on the same plane as it is. The alarm resets 1d4 rounds later. When you cast the spell, you can specify creatures that will not trigger the alarm. The skull can be moved from its original position by anyone who can get to it without entering its monitored area. The skull has AC 12, hardness 1, and 1 hit point per caster level. You are not magically made aware of the skull’s destruction if it has not been triggered. Focus: The humanoid skull upon which the spell is cast.  SLAPPING HAND  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)  You complete the spell and blow into the leather glove. Immediately a blue-white, translucent hand appears next to the enemy and smacks it across the side of the head—not enough to hurt it, but hard enough to give others nearby a chance to attack. This spell distracts the subject, causing it to immediately provoke attacks of opportunity from creatures threatening its space. The spell allows no saving throw, but a slapped creature can negate the effect with a DC 20 Concentration check. Focus: A leather glove.  CHAPTER 1  Upon completion of this spell, you are infused with unearthly grace and conﬁdence.  SKULL WATCH  Effect: One Tiny hand Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation Level: Bard 4, druid 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  have in your control (4 HD per caster level, as with animate dead). Material Component: One ﬁnger bone from a humanoid and one onyx gem worth 50 gp per skeleton to be created.  SLASHING DARKNESS  Evocation Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You complete this spell and a hissing, hurtlingribbonofpuredarknessﬂiesfrom your hand. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. A creature struck by this ray of negative energy takes 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8). An undead creature instead heals 1d8 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d8).  SLIDE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Whenyouspeakthewordthatactivatesthe spell,thesolesofyourally’sfeetglowyellow  191  Illus. by E. Polak  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Green slime from a slime wave spell devours everything but stone  asheisliftedslightlyofftheground.Heslips ﬁve feet across the ground, into position to ﬂank his opponent. You slide the subject creature along the ground a distance of 5 feet in any direction. (If the creature is ﬂying or otherwise not on the ground, it moves parallel to the ground.) You can’t slide the subject into a space that is occupied by an ally, an enemy, or a solid object; if you attempt to do so, the spell automatically ends. You cannot slide the subject up or down, but you can slide it over the edge of a cliff or other drop-off if you desire. This movement does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  SLIDE, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) This spell functions like slide, except as described above, and you can slide the  192  subject creature 20 feet in a straight line. This movement likewise does not provoke attacks of opportunity.  SLIME WAVE  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Cleric 7, druid 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 15-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: No Youﬁnishthespell,andahorrendouswave of green slime explodes outward from the spot where you point. You create a wave of green slime (DMG 76) that begins at the point of origin you choose and violently spreads to the limit of the area. The wave splashes and splatters as it passes; some slime clings to any wall or ceiling the wave touches. Green slime devours ﬂesh and  organic materials on contact, and even dissolves metal. Each creature in the area is covered with one patch of green slime. Unlike normal green slime, the slime created by this spell gradually evaporates, disappearing by the end of the duration. Material Component: A few drops of stagnant pond water.  SLOW BURN  Transmutation [Fire] Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 30-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 minute Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No The desire to live into old age grips you as younearcompletionofthisspell.Thefeeling passesasyoudesignatetheareaofthespell, wheretheﬂamesthereﬂickerforamoment as if a gust of wind had hit them.  Transmutation Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Your hand glows red brieﬂy upon casting this spell, and after you slap your foe on the back, you try to hide a grin. You bestow on your target an aroma that attracts predatory animals. They prefer to attack the subject over other targets, and animals attacking the subject creature gain a +1 bonus per three caster levels (maximum +3) on attack rolls and damage rolls.  SNAKE’S SWIFTNESS  Transmutation Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action  You toss the scales into the air, and they vanish in a sparkling mist as you indicate your target. Without hesitating, that creature draws and ﬁres an arrow into the fray. The subject can immediately make one melee or ranged attack. Taking this action doesn’t affect the subject’s normal place in the initiative order. This is a single attack and follows the standard rules for attacking. This spell does not allow the subject to make more than one additional attack in a round. If the subject has already made an additional attack, due to a prior casting of this spell, from the haste spell, or from any other source, this spell fails. Arcane Material Component: A few scales from a snake.  SNAKE’S SWIFTNESS, MASS  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Allied creatures in a 20-ft.radius burst You hold the snake scales high overhead, and they evaporate in a ﬂash of light. That radiance carries to every ally in your command—and as one, they unleash a volley of attacks. This spell functions like snake’s swiftness, except that it affects multiple allies out to medium range.  SNAKEBITE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, ranger 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) You cast the spell, and one of your arms turns into a venomous bright-green snake  with a fanged, biting mouth that drips poison. This spell transforms one of your arms into a poisonous serpent. As an attack action, you can strike an opponent with your snake arm by making a successful melee attack. The bite from the venomous serpent deals damage equal to 1d3 points + your Str modiﬁer, and it carries a toxic venom that deals 2 points of Constitution damage as initial and secondary damage. Each instance of ability damage can be negated by a Fortitude save (DC equal to this spell’s DC). You can’t hold a weapon with your transformed hand, but your other hand can be used to wield weapons or cast spells with somatic components. Attacking with the transformed hand and a weapon incurs the standard twoweapon ﬁghting penalties (PH 160). You can be under the effect of only one snakebite spell at any given time.  CHAPTER 1  SMELL OF FEAR  Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One allied creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell lends fuel to existing ﬁres within the spell’s area, allowing them to burn off the intangible power of passion as much as from physical substance. Because these ﬁres consume less of the physical fuel that sustain them, they burn for twice as long without losing any of their intensity, but their illumination radius is halved. In addition, an affected ﬁre is much harder to extinguish. It takes twice as long to put out a ﬁre that is under the effect of this spell, and if a roll is required (such as the Reﬂex save required to extinguish ﬂames if a creature is on ﬁre), two successful rolls over 2 rounds are required to successfully put out the ﬁre. If one such roll fails, the creature must begin trying to extinguish the ﬂames again as if it had never succeeded on the ﬁrst roll. Magical ﬁre used against a target in this spell’s area, such as from a produce ﬂame or ﬁreball spell, does not burn as effectively, and ﬁre damage from such sources is reduced by 1 point per die. Slow burn counters or dispels the effect of raging ﬂame (page 164). Arcane Material Component: An oilﬁlled hourglass.  SNIPER’S EYE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D) Holdingtheglasslensbeforeyou,youtake a series of slow, deep breaths. Whispered words of arcane power seep past your lips with each exhalation. As you complete the spell you feel infused with deadly ability. When you cast sniper’s eye, you gain the following beneﬁts. • +10 competence bonus on Spot checks. • Darkvision out to 60 feet. • The ability to make a ranged sneak attack at a range of up to 60 feet, rather than 30 feet. • The ability to make a death attack with a ranged weapon rather than just with a melee weapon. The target must be within 60 feet. This spell doesn’t grant you the ability to make a sneak attack or death attack if you don’t already have that ability. Sniper’s eye attunes you completely to the vantage point you had when  193  you cast the spell. You understand the nuances of the breeze and every angle and shadow—from that spot. If you move even 5 feet from the place where you cast the spell, you lose the beneﬁts of sniper’s eye until you return to that spot. Focus: A magnifying glass lens.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SNIPER’S SHOT  Divination Level: Assassin 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/ wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  Illus. by J. Engle  While muttering a short chant you focus your awareness, looking only at the areas of your foe that seem most vital to its survival. Your ranged attacks made before the start of your next turn can be sneak attacks regardless of the distance between you and your target. You must still fulﬁll the other conditions for making a sneak attack against the target. This spell doesn’t grant you the ability to make a sneak attack if you don’t already have that ability.  SNOWBALL SWARM  Evocation [Cold] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action  194  Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Asyoucastthisspell,thosearoundyousense an unnatural chill. This vanishes, though, asyoureleaseaburstoffrost-ﬁlledpowerin the midst of your foes. A ﬂurry of magic snowballs erupts from a point you select. The swarm of snowballs deals 2d6 points of cold damage to creatures and objects within the burst. For every two caster levels beyond 3rd, the snowballs deal an extra 1d6 points of damage, to a maximum of 5d6 at 9th level or higher. Material Component: A piece of ice or a small white rock chip.  SNOWSHOES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) A chill grips you as you complete the spell and touch your intended subject. The feet of the spell’s subject glow with an ice-blue radiancethatfadesbutlingers.Thecreature risesslightlyoutofthesnow,asifitweighed much less.  The affected creature can walk lightly over ice and snow without having its speed reduced. The affected creature gains a 10-foot enhancement bonus to speed and is not required to make a Balance check or Reﬂex save to walk on ice and snow without slipping and falling, to avoid cracking ice it walks over, or to avoid falling through cracked ice. In addition, the affected creature does not leave a more readily discernible trail through ice and snow than it does on solid ground, denying trackers potential bonuses to follow the affected creature’s path. (See Weather, DMG 93–95, and Cold Dangers, DMG 302, for more details on the effects of weather and ice.)  SNOWSHOES, MASS  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3, ranger 3 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Thefeetofallthedesignatedcreaturesglow with an ice-blue aura. Each subject in turn rises slightly to the top of the snow, as if it were held aloft by the cold blue sheen. This spell functions like snowshoes, except as noted above.  SOLIPSISM  Illusion (Phantasm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level)  The snowshoes spell gives a druid the upper hand when ﬁghting foes in the snow  Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Pangs of loneliness grip your heart as you complete the spell. Upon choosing your target,thefeelingsubsidesevenasaghostly pale yellow mist swirls around your target for a moment.  Transmutation Level: Bard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Performance +1 hour or until discharged; see text Youintonethissimplespellandyourcontrol over your voice improves, your unruly hair straightens, and your ﬂesh radiates a healthy glow. You’re ready for showtime. You acquire an even greater charisma when you perform. Anyone who hears or views your performance becomes favorably inclined toward you. This spell grants you a +1 competence bonus on your next Charisma-based check involving any one person who saw the performance. This effect lasts for the duration of your performance and up to 1 hour immediately following. You must begin the performance within 1 hour of casting the spell for it to have any effect.  SONIC BLAST  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1  You blast the target with loud and highpitched sounds. The subject takes 1d4 points of sonic damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d4) and must make a Will save or be deafened for 1d4 rounds. This spell has no effect if cast into the area of a silence spell.  SONIC RUMBLE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Your ﬁnal words of the spell become a deep, rumbling hum, as loud as the din of a battleﬁeld, and they blast outward from you in a cone. You create a cone of powerful sound. If used to attack, the cone deals 1d6 points of sonic damage per two levels (maximum 10d6) each round a creature is within the area; a successful Reﬂex save reduces this damage by half. Targets within the area of a silence spell are immune. Focus: A hollow cone of brass and gold worth 50 gp.  SONIC SNAP  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature or object Duration: Instantaneous  You bark the last word of the spell, and that wordtakeslife,streakingtowardyourtarget and exploding in a shout. You create a brief but loud noise adjacent to the target. The subject takes 1 point of sonic damage and must succeed on a Will saving throw or be deafened for 1 round. This spell has no effect if cast into the area of a silence spell.  SONIC WEAPON  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  CHAPTER 1  SONGBIRD  The words of your spell twist upon each other and grow stronger. Then, like a cluster of bees, they streak toward your target and detonate in a screaming bellow around him.  Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You manipulate the senses of one creature so that it perceives itself to be the only real creature in all of existence and everything around it to be merely an illusion. If the target fails its save, it is convinced of the unreality of every situation it might encounter. It takes no actions, not even purely mental actions, and instead watches the world around it with bemusement. The subject becomes effectively helpless and takes no steps to defend itself from any threat, since it considers any hostile action merely another illusion.  Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes  Holding the weapon to your mouth, you whisperthespell’sarcanewords,shrouding the weapon in visible sound like a thin sheen of water. While the spell is in effect, the affected weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of sonic damage with each successful attack. The sonic energy does not harm the weapon’s wielder. Bows, crossbows, and slings that are affected by this spell bestow the sonic energy upon their ammunition.  SONIC WHIP  Evocation [Sonic, Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A whip of force Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: No As you make a cracking sound and hold out your hand, the small silk whip within your grasp dissipates and a life-sized whip ofhissing blueforceappears inyourgrasp. Withexpertprecision,youmanagetomake the invisible whip in your hand crack. This spell creates a whip of sonic energy that you wield as if you had proﬁciency with it. Simply cracking a sonic whip  195  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  as a free action keeps normal animals (but not dire animals, magical beasts, or vermin) at bay unless they succeed on a Will save. Affected animals stay at least 30 feet away from you for the duration of the spell, as space permits. On a successful ranged attack with the whip, any normal animal you strike must succeed on a Will save or become frightened. Against other creature types, you can use a sonic whip in combat as if it were a normal whip. Material Component: A miniature silk whip.  SONOROUS HUM  Illus. by C. Dien  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 2, cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  196  You ﬁnish casting this spell, and the area around you is abuzz with a low, droning hum that improves your concentration. After you cast this spell, the next spell you cast within the duration that requires concentration to maintain is maintained for you until the sonorous hum spell expires. This effect allows you to cast other spells, even another spell that also requires concentration. If the spell maintained by the sonorous hum has a shorter duration than that of this spell, the maintained spell expires as it normally would, and you gain no further beneﬁts from this casting of sonorous hum. The sound created by the spell is as loud as a person in armor walking at a slow pace trying not to make noise (normally a DC 5 Listen check to detect). You can end the spell as a free action. For example, you could cast this spell, then cast detect thoughts, and this spell maintains the concentration on detect thoughts while you cast discern lies and maintain concentration on that spell yourself. You control all aspects of both spells, so you could change the orientation of the detect thoughts effect and select a different target for your discern lies spell in the same round.  A sound lance is visible as waves in the air  If you take damage, you must still make a Concentration check to maintain the spell.  SOUND LANCE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature or object Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes You unleash a shrill, piercing cry at your target, which takes the barely visible form  of a translucent lance hurtling through the air. This spell causes a projectile of intense sonic energy to leap from you to a target within range. The sound deals 1d8 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d8). A sound lance cannot penetrate the area of a silence spell.  SPARK OF LIFE  Necromancy Level: Cleric 3, druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Undead creature touched Duration: 1 round/level  Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Atouchfromyourhandoutlinesanundead creature in a faint yellow glow, making it vulnerable to many of the dangers that can harm living creatures.  Necromancy Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Hoping that your friend will not have need of the spell, you ensure that his death in the coming battle won’t result in an even greater abomination. The subject does not rise as an undead spawn should it perish from an undead’s attack that normally would  Transmutation [LanguageDependent] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Targets: Any number of allied creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart As you rub the small piece of copper wire, it begins to buzz with the latent magical energyofthespell.Whenyouﬁnallyrelease the spell’s energy, you hear the words you wish to share with your allies in your mind—and moments later you hear their unspoken replies. This spell functions like message (PH 253), except as noted above and that you and the recipients don’t have to mouth the words or whisper, which means that those skilled in reading lips have no opportunity to learn the messages.  SPECTRAL TOUCH  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level (D); see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes A touch from your hand, which crackles withblackenergy,weakensthelifeforceof living creatures. Each melee touch attack you successfully make during the spell’s duration channels negative energy that bestows one negative level on the target and grants you 5 temporary hit points. This  CHAPTER 1  SPAWN SCREEN  SPEAK TO ALLIES  spell cannot give you more temporary hit points than your normal starting hit points (your hit point total cannot exceed two times your normal starting hit points). Both the negative level and the temporary hit points last for up to 1 hour. You can use this attack once per round for a number of rounds equal to your caster level. Any charges of the spell not used by the time the duration expires are lost. An undead creature you touch instead gains 5 temporary hit points and you lose a like amount (no save). Temporary hit points gained in this way last for up to 1 hour.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  For the duration of the spell, the undead creature is subject to extra damage from critical hits (and thus sneak attacks), nonlethal damage, ability drain, energy drain, fatigue, exhaustion, and damage to its physical ability scores (though it still lacks a Constitution score and thus can’t take Constitution damage) as if it were alive. It loses its immunity to effects that require a Fortitude save, as well as its invulnerability to poison, sleep effects, paralysis, stunning, disease, and death effects. However, an undead affected by this spell gains a bonus on its Fortitude saves equal to its Charisma bonus (if any). (The bonus doesn’t apply to Fortitude saves against effects that also affect objects.) It must breathe, eat, and sleep just like a normal living creature (though the last two aren’t likely to come into play thanks to the spell’s short duration). While it is under the effect of this spell, both negative energy (such as inﬂict spells) and positive energy (such as cure spells) heal damage to the undead creature, rather than damaging it. An undead creature affected by this spell retains all of its other traits.  turn it into a spawn, such as from the bite of a ghoul (MM 118). This spell doesn’t prevent the subject from perishing or provide anything other than insurance that the subject’s body and spirit cannot be hijacked by an acquisitive undead creature. The protection applies if the duration is still in effect when the subject ﬁrst dies; the spell need not linger in its effect during the period immediately prior to a spawn’s rise. This spell cannot be cast on the body of a creature that has already been killed by a spawncreating undead.  SPECTRAL WEAPON  Illusion (Shadow) Level: Assassin 3, bard 4, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: 0 ft. Effect: One shadowy blade Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes Yousummonforthsemisolidshadowstuff andforceittocoalesceintoashapeonlyyou can wield. The shadow-formed weapon looks real at ﬁrst glance, though it appears darkened as if perpetually in shadows. Wispsofshadowtendrilsconstantlyfollow the weapon as you move it about. Using material from the Plane of Shadow, you can fashion a quasi-real melee weapon of any type with which you are proﬁcient. This spectral weapon appears in your hand and behaves as a normal weapon of its type, with two exceptions. First, you resolve attacks with your spectral weapon as melee touch attacks instead of melee attacks. Second, any foe you hit is entitled to a Will save to recognize the weapon’s shadowy, semi-insubstantial nature. If the save is successful, that opponent takes only half damage from the weapon on that attack and all subsequent attacks, and is only 50% likely to suffer any special effects of your attacks (such as a death attack delivered with the weapon). You can maintain only one spectral weapon at a time, and only you can wield it. The weapon dissipates when you let  197  go of it or when the spell’s duration expires, whichever comes ﬁrst.  Illus. by D. Martin  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SPEECHLINK  Divination Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Targets: You and one creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Tappingyourﬁngertothesideofyourhead and to your intended subject, you whisper wordsofgreetingtocompletethespell.You then hear your subject’s voice as if it were speaking directly into your ear. You and a willing subject can communicate verbally no matter how much distance you put between yourselves on the same plane. Either participant can end the spell at any time. Speechlink allows you and your allies each to hear the other’s vocalizations, whatever their volume. It does not transfer other sounds from either participant’s location. This spell works on any creatures, including animals, but does not convey any special language comprehension ability.  prepared spells for other spells from your spellbook. Each prepared spell must be swapped for a spell of the same level. Empty spell slots from a spell cast earlier in the day (including the casting of this spell) cannot be refreshed. Preparing spells within the light provided by a spell engine takes only half as long as normal. Material Components: A disk of polished bone, one of your tears, and a silver wheel worth 500 gp. XP Cost: 250 XP.  SPELL ENHANCER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round You utter an ancient word tied to the fundamental principles of magic and immediatelybegincasting another spell.  SPELL ENGINE  Abjuration [Force] Level: Wizard 8 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: 5-ft.-radius magical wheel Duration: See text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text You speak a word of abjuration and thrust aloft the bone disk andsilverwheel,heldtogetherby a single tear. The disk and wheel begin to spin, then vanish, but you feel the power of the mystic engine created nearby. Upon casting this spell, you can swap out any or all of your  198  A spectral weapon appears fearsome at ﬁrst glance  This spell enhances the next spell you cast, making it more difﬁcult for targets to resist. The next spell you cast this round is cast at +2 caster level, and its save DC increases by 1.  SPELL FLOWER  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Joiningmysteriousphraseswiththesimple motion of ﬂexing your ﬁngers, you imbue your hands with receptive magical energy that crackles and glows a soft orange. You are able to hold the charge for one touch spell per arm of your body as long as you don’t use a changed limb to cast another spell or touch anything with it. Each touch spell you cast resides in a different forelimb. For the duration of this spell, any touch spells you cast are discharged only if you cast another spell with that forelimb or touch something with that forelimb. For example, a human sorcerer casts this spell, then casts chill touch and holds the charge in his left hand, then casts shocking grasp and holds the charge in his right hand. Because of the spell ﬂower, he can hold the charge on both of these spells at the same time. If he casts another spell with a somatic component (which requires the use of one of his hands), he immediately loses one of his held touch spells (his choice), but if the spell he casts is also a touch spell, he can immediately hold the charge in the available hand. If he chooses to attack with a touch spell, it works normally. Since he has multiple limbs that are considered armed, he can make an off-hand attack with the other touch spell in the same round, with the normal penalties for ﬁghting with two weapons (PH 160).  Abjuration Level: Cleric 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Silverymotesoflightbegintosnowdownas youcompletethespell,shiftingtoitsrecipientuponyoursuccessfultouch.Themotes coalesce into a nimbus that contracts and holds to the subject as a silvery sheen. This spell protects one creature from a single 1st- or 2nd-level spell. The creature effectively has unbeatable spell resistance regarding the chosen spell. Lesser spell immunity can’t protect a creature from a spell to which spell resistance doesn’t apply. This spell works against other spells, spell-like effects, and innate spell-like abilities. It does not protect against supernatural or extraordinary abilities, such as breath weapons or gaze attacks. Only a particular spell can be protected against, not a school of spells or a group of spells with similar effects; thus, a creature given immunity to inﬂict light wounds is still susceptible to inﬂict moderate wounds. A creature can have only one lesser spellimmunityorspellimmunity(PH282) in effect at a time.  SPELL MATRIX  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Effect: Matrix that holds two of your spells  SPELL MATRIX, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Effect: Matrix that holds three of your spells This spell functions like lesser spell matrix, except that you can store up to three spells of up to 3rd level, and you take 3d6 points of damage instead of 1d6 upon casting. The matrix closes after 3 rounds and no more spells can be added, even if it is not full. In addition, you can designate one spell or one spell sequence held in the matrix to come into effect under a condition you dictate when casting greater spell matrix. The spell (or sequence of spells) to be activated by the triggering condition must be of a type that affects your own person, such as levitate or feather fall. The conditions required to bring the desired spell or spells into effect must be clear, although they can be general. In all cases, greater spell matrix immediately brings into effect the designated spell or sequence of spells, which is cast instantaneously when the designated circumstances occur. You cannot choose to have the spell or spells not activate when the triggering event occurs. Focus: A diamond with a minimum value of 1,500 gp.  SPELL MATRIX, LESSER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  Range: Personal Effect: Matrix that holds one of your spells Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Concentrating as you intone the arcane words,youenvisionyourmindasamazeof paths and doors. You get a chill as the spell completes and some of the doors open. You prepare a magical matrix that allows you to store one of your spells and use it later as a swift action. In the round after you cast lesser spell matrix, you can cast one spell of up to 3rd level to be stored in it. The matrix closes after 1 round, whether or not you have stored a spell in it. Only a spell that can be altered by the Quicken Spell feat can be placed in the matrix, and any spell stored there is treated as a prepared spell. Casting lesser spell matrix deals 1d6 points of damage to you, and this damage cannot be healed by any means while the matrix exists. While the matrix is active, you can cast the spell stored in it as a swift action. Once it is cast from the matrix, the spell is gone. A dispel magic spell that successfully dispels the matrix also dispels the spell held inside it. If you are affected by an antimagic ﬁeld, the duration of the matrix is interrupted, but the spell does not activate. The matrix becomes active again when you emerge from the antimagic ﬁeld. If you die while the spell is still held in the matrix, both the spell and the matrix dissipate harmlessly. Focus: A piece of amber with a minimum value of 500 gp.  CHAPTER 1  SPELL IMMUNITY, LESSER  This spell functions like lesser spell matrix, except that you can store up to two spells of up to 3rd level, and you take 2d6 points of damage instead of 1d6 upon casting. The matrix closes after 2 rounds and no more spells can be added, even if it is not full. In addition, you can decide to link the two spells stored in the matrix into a spell sequence if both are 2nd level or lower. You can then discharge the two linked spells as a single swift action, just as if you were casting the lone spell from a spell matrix. Focus: A sapphire with a minimum value of 1,000 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  A marilith spellcaster could do the same as the sorcerer in the previous example, except that she could hold the charge on up to six touch spells. She could also use any of her spell-like or supernatural abilities, since those do not interfere with holding a charge. If the spell ﬂower effect ends, the most recent touch spell cast remains as a held charge and all other held spells dissipate.  SPELL RESISTANCE, MASS  Abjuration Level: Cleric 7 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Wrapping your allies in protective magic, you give them the ability to shrug off spells. This spell functions like spell resistance (PH 282), except as noted here.  199  SPELL VULNERABILITY  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No  Avioletsprayspringsfromyourﬁngertips and wraps around your opponent. It fades intoadullpurpleglow,whichattractsspell energiesasopposedtoshruggingthemoff. This spell reduces the subject’s spell resistance by 1 per caster level (maximum reduction 15). This reduction can’t lower a subject’s spell resistance below 0.  Illus. by M. Phillippi  SPHERE OF ULTIMATE DESTRUCTION Conjuration (Creation) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./ level) Effect: 2-ft.-radius sphere Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  When struck by the sphere, a subject takes 2d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 40d6). Any creature reduced to 0 or fewer hit points by this spell is disintegrated, leaving behind only a trace of ﬁne dust (though its equipment is unaffected). When used against an object, the sphere disintegrates as much as one 10-foot cube of nonliving matter. A creature or object that makes a successful Fortitude save is partially affected, taking only 5d6 points of damage. If this damage reduces the creature or object to 0 or fewer hit points, it is disintegrated. The effects of the sphere count as a disintegrate spell for the purpose of destroying a wall of force or any other spell or effect speciﬁcally affected by disintegrate. If the sphere moves beyond the spell’s range, it winks out. Material Component: A pinch of dust from a disintegrated creature.  SPIDER CURSE  Transmutation [Mind-Affecting] Level: Spider 6 Components: V, S, DF  Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller humanoid Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youpourthepowerofthespellintothebody of another. That creature, now but a vessel ofyourwill,takestheshapeofacentaurlike spider creature called a drider. You turn a humanoid into a creature resembling a drider (MM 89) that obeys your mental commands. The transmuted subject gains a spider’s body with a humanoid head, arms, and torso, just like a drider. The subject has a drider’s speed, natural armor, bite attack, and poison (but see below). The subject gains a +4 bonus to Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution. The subject becomes size Large, with a space of 10 feet and a reach of 5 feet. The subject gains a –1 penalty to AC and on attack rolls due to size. The subject retains its Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, level and class,  Asyousuccessfullycomplete the intricate gestures and tongue-tying syllables of this spell, you conjure a featurelessblacksphereof nothingness. Matter that touches the sphere disappears, causing a slight breeze to form that blows endlessly in the directionoftheall-consuming blackness.  200  You create a terrible sphere that destroys anything it touches. The sphere ﬂies up to 30 feet per round. The sphere stops moving when it enters a space containing a creature, automatically striking it. You must actively direct it to a new target as a move action. A sphere of ultimate destruction destroys everything it touches  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Five summoned spiders Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youreyesrollingwildlyintheirsockets,you cackle the last few words to call upon your deity’spower.Anumberofmassivespiders spring up from the earth in the location you indicate. This spell summons ﬁve celestial or ﬁendish Large monstrous spiders (MM 289). They appear where you designate and act immediately, on your turn. They attack your opponents to the best of their ability. If you can communicate with the spiders, you can direct them not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform other actions. A celestial spider summoned by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite evil attack that provides a +4 bonus on one damage roll.  SPIDER POISON  Necromancy Level: Assassin 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdthehuskofthespiderinyourhand and speak the words of the spell. The husk vanishes, but leaves in your palm the brief glowing image of a spider. You poison a subject by making a successful melee touch attack. The poison deals 1d6 points of Strength damage immediately and another 1d6 points of Strength damage 1 minute later. Each instance of damage can be negated by a Fortitude save (DC 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your relevant spellcasting ability modiﬁer (Intelligence for wizards and assassins, Charisma for sorcerers). Material Component: A poisonous spider, alive or dead.  SPIDER SHAPES  Transmutation Level: Spider 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One willing creature/level, all within 30 ft. of each other Duration: 1 hour/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You channel the power of the spell into the willing masses before you, granting them the blessed forms of spiders. This spell functions like polymorph (PH 283), except that you polymorph up to one willing creature per level into a monstrous spider (MM 288) of any  size from Tiny to Huge as you decide. Unlike with polymorph, this spell allows the subjects to gain a spider’s poisonous bite. All the creatures you transmute must become spiders of the same size. Subjects remain in the spider form until the spell expires or you dismiss the spell for all subjects. In addition, an individual subject can choose to resume its normal form as a full-round action. Doing so ends the spell for that creature only.  SPIDERFORM  Transmutation Level: Drow 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level (D)  CHAPTER 1  SPIDER PLAGUE  A ﬁendish creature (MM 107) summoned by this spell has damage reduction 5/magic; resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance 9; and a smite good attack that provides a +4 bonus on one damage roll. When you use a summoning spell to summon an evil or good creature, it is a spell of that type.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  hit points (despite any change in Constitution), alignment, base attack bonus, and base saves. (New Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores might affect ﬁnal Armor Class, attack, and save bonuses.) The subject’s equipment remains and continues to function as long as it ﬁts a drider’s body shape. Otherwise it is subsumed into the new form and ceases to function for the duration of the spell. Retained items include anything worn on the upper body (head, neck, shoulders, hands, arms, and waist). Nonfunctioning items include anything worn on the legs, feet, or the whole body (armor, robes, vestments, and boots). The subject’s bite delivers a poison with a Fortitude save DC of 16 + your Wisdom bonus. Initial and secondary damage is 1d6 points of Strength damage. Your control over the subject is like that provided by a dominate person spell (PH 224). (You telepathically control the creature as long as it remains within range.)  You invest the power of the spell into yourself, twisting and bending your own form into that of a spider. You can polymorph into a drider (MM 89) or a Tiny, Small, Medium, or Large monstrous spider (MM 288). You regain lost hit points as if you rested for a day on the initial transformation. The spell lasts until you decide to resume your normal shape. You acquire the physical and natural abilities of the creature you polymorph into, including natural size, Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution, armor, attack routines, and movement capabilities. You also acquire the poisonous bite and web-spinning ability of whichever spider form you choose. You retain your Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores, level and class, hit points (despite any change in Constitution), alignment, base attack bonus, and base saves. (New Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores might affect ﬁnal attack and save bonuses.) You can cast spells and use magic items if you choose drider form, but no other spider form is capable of spellcasting or manipulating devices. If you choose drider form, your equipment remains and continues to function as long as it ﬁts a drider’s body shape. Retained items include anything worn on the upper body (head, neck, shoulders, hands, arms, and waist). Otherwise your equipment  201  is subsumed into the new form and ceases to function for the duration of the spell.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SPIDERSKIN  Transmutation Level: Druid 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You cast this spell upon yourself, and your ﬂesh glows yellow. The glow quickly subsides, but you feel your ﬂesh thicken, its surface growing harder and more like a carapace. The spell grants the recipient a +1 enhancement bonus to its existing natural armor bonus, a +1 racial bonus on saves against poison, and a +1 racial bonus on Hide checks for every three caster levels you have. This means that the bonuses to natural armor, saves, and Hide checks improve to +2 at caster level 6th, +3 at caster level 9th, +4 at 12th, and +5 at 15th. The enhancement bonus provided by spiderskin stacks with the subject’s natural armor bonus, but not with other enhancement bonuses to natural armor. A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor bonus of +0, much as a character wearing only normal clothing has an armor bonus of +0. Arcane Material Component: The leg of a spider.  SPIKES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 With the sound of twisting wood, the weapon you touch grows sharp spikes like rose thorns. This spell functions like brambles (page 38), except that the affected weapon gains a +2 enhancement bonus on its attack rolls, and its threat range is doubled. This effect does not stack with other effects that increase a weapon’s threat range, such as the Improved Critical feat.  202  SPIRIT WORM  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 1 round/level, up to 5 rounds; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youpressthebitofblackenedboneagainst your foe and intone the spell. The bone vanishes, leaving a mottled bruise where it touched. You create a lingering decay in the spirit and body of the target. If the target fails its saving throw, it takes 1 point of Constitution damage each round while the spell lasts (maximum 5 points). The victim can attempt a Fortitude saving throw each round, and success negates the Constitution damage for that round and ends the spell. Material Component: A piece of ﬁreblackened ivory or bone carved in the shape of a segmented worm.  SPIRITJAWS  Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 + 10 ft./level) Effect: Jaws of force Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Youcalluponthepowerofthedinosaursto completethespell.Asetofghostlydinosaur jaws comes into being and attacks the creature you designate. This spell creates a set of powerful jaws of force. The jaws attempt to grapple the designated opponent, starting with one attack in the round the spell is cast and continuing each round thereafter. The spiritjaws use your base attack bonus (possibly allowing it multiple attacks per round in subsequent rounds) + your Wis modiﬁer as its attack bonus. If an initial attack hits, the spiritjaws deal 2d6 points of damage and attempt  to start a grapple as a free action. The jaws’ bonus on grapple checks is equal to their attack bonus + 4. Once the opponent is grappled, the jaws deal 2d6 points of damage with each subsequent grapple check. The target is considered to be grappling and cannot move. The target creature no longer threatens squares and loses its Dexterity bonus to AC against opponents not grappling it. The set of jaws always strikes from your direction. It does not get a bonus for ﬂanking or help a combatant get one. Your feats do not affect the jaws. If the jaws move beyond the range of the spell, they vanish. Attacking the set of jaws has no effect. As a magical force effect, the jaws cannot be damaged, but disintegrate or a sphere of annihilation destroys the effect. The grappled opponent can cast a spell only if the spell has no somatic component, the material components are in hand, and a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level) is made. A creature grappled by the set of jaws can attempt to escape by succeeding on a grapple check against the jaws or by making a successful Escape Artist check as a standard action opposed by the set of jaws’ grapple check. As a free action, you can direct the jaws to pin a grappled opponent instead of dealing damage with a grapple check. If the jaws win the opposed grapple check, the opponent is pinned. A pinned opponent is held immobile and must break the pin before it can escape the grapple. Creatures other than those grappling the pinned target gain a +4 bonus on attack rolls to hit it. If the jaws have multiple attacks (granted by your attack bonus), you can use them to cause damage to a pinned target or to make more grapple attempts against that target. If you become unable to command the jaws, they vanish. Material Component: A piece of bone from a dinosaur’s jaw.  SPIRITUAL CHARIOT  Conjuration (Creation) [Force] Level: Blackguard 3, paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One special mount Duration: 1 hour/level  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You cast this spell, and a large and ornate chariot made of transparent, faintly glowingazureenergyformsbehindyourspecial mount.  SPLINTERBOLT  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One or more streams of splinters Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS Illus. by L. Parillo  You conjure a chariot of force. When the chariot appears, your special mount is correctly harnessed to it. The chariot can hold one Medium creature or two Small creatures plus the driver (usually the paladin). Although the chariot seems large and sturdy, it and its occupants have no weight for the purpose of the mount’s load, so the mount can travel at full speed. If the chariot is ever unhitched from the special mount, it disappears. The driver of the spiritual chariot gains a +4 sacred bonus on Handle Animal checks. The chariot is made of magical force and has immunity to most types of damage. It interacts with other spells just as a wall of force (PH 298) does. Those in the chariot have cover based on their size and the position of their attackers. In most situations, Medium creatures inside the chariot gain cover.  is disrupted. A living creature passing through the wall takes 1d10 points of damage, as above, and must make a Fortitude save or gain one negative level. The barrier is semimaterial and opaque, providing cover and total concealment against physical attacks, and it blocks line of effect for magical effects (including spells, spell-like abilities, and supernatural abilities). Material Component: A clear cut gemstone.  SPIRITWALL  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./ level) Effect: Swirling wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level, or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 1 ft./level Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None; see text Spell Resistance: No With a deep groan, as from a being subjectedtoeternalpain,youunleashthespell. Animmobile,swirlingmassofgreen-white forms resembling tortured spirits forms nearby.Themasscontinuesthelowgroaning you uttered while casting the spell. One side of the wall, selected by you, emits a low groaning that causes creatures within 60 feet of that side to make a Will save or become frightened and ﬂee for 1d4 rounds. Any living creature that merely touches the wall takes 1d10 points of damage as its life force A spirit wall can only effectively bar the living  203  Illus. by F. Vohwindel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You extend your hand toward your foe, ﬂicking a single sliver of wood into the air, and a splinter larger than a titan’s javelin whistles through the air. You must make a ranged attack to hit the target. If you hit, the splinterbolt deals 4d6 points of piercing damage. A splinterbolt threatens a critical hit on a roll of 18–20. You can ﬁre one additional splinterbolt for every four levels beyond 3rd (to a maximum of three at 11th level). You can ﬁre these splinterbolts at the same or different targets, but all splinterbolts must be aimed at targets within 30 feet of each other and ﬁred simultaneously. A creature’s damage reduction, if any, applies to the damage from this spell. The damage from splinterbolt is treated as magic and piercing for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Material Component: A splinter of wood.  SPONTANEOUS SEARCH  Divination Level: Sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) With a leisurely wave and a declaration of boredom, you complete the spell. You instantlybecomeawareofthelocationand types of objects in the spell’s area, as if you had made a quick search. The subject of this spell knows the contents of a 20-foot-radius burst, as if it had taken 10 on a Search check for each object and space in the burst radius, including noting the location of traps (though only a rogue can locate those traps with a DC greater than 20). Material Component: A silk glove.  STABILIZE  204  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Paladin 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action  Area: 50-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless); see text Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Filled with compassion and concern, you draw upon your deity’s power. A burst of goldenenergyspringsforth,spreadingfrom you. Those still alive around you seem less bloody and in less pain. This spell, designed to work on the battleﬁeld, allows you to stabilize the dying all around you. A burst of positive energy spreads out from you, healing 1 point of damage to all living creatures in the affected area, whether allied or not. This spell deals 1 point of damage to undead creatures, which are allowed a Will saving throw to negate the effect.  STALKING BRAND  Transmutation Level: Ranger 1 Components: S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes With a wave of your hand, you cause a tiny mark to appear upon the target’s forehead. “I will know you in any form or visage,” you say. This spell marks your target with a tiny symbol visible only to you and to detect magic. The brand appears as you envision it, approximately 1 inch in diameter. You can see the brand even if the subject uses magical means to change or hide its appearance. Spells suchasdisguiseself,polymorph,andinvisibility do not hide the brand. To your eyes, the mark glows a light green.  STALWART PACT  Evocation Level: Cleric 5, Pact 5 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched  Duration: Permanent until triggered, then 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You touch your ally and empower him with a spell that will later take effect in dire need. Once this spell is cast, it remains dormant until the subject is reduced to half or less of its full normal hit points. Once the subject has taken enough damage to reduce it to half or lower hit points, it immediately gains 5 temporary hit points per two caster levels (maximum 35 hit points at 14th level), damage reduction 5/magic, and a +2 luck bonus on saving throws. The hit points, damage reduction, and saving throw bonus disappear when the spell ends. Material Component: Incense worth 250 gp.  STANDING WAVE  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Waves under a creature or object within range Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes Roaring a binding phrase, you take command of the water, causing a wave to rise and propelling it in the direction you desire. You command the waters to lift a creature or object and propel it forward. An object so lifted can contain creatures or other objects. The maximum size of the creature or object the wave can lift depends on your caster level. Caster Level 5th 7th 9th 11th 13th  Size of Creature or Object Medium Large Huge Gargantuan Colossal  Standing wave moves the lifted creature or object in a straight line at a  The standing wave spell is useful for moving foes—and for simply moving  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  speed of 60 feet over water. The spell dissipates when the wave contacts land, lowering its burden harmlessly to shore. If you are riding in or standing on the object, the object continues to move until you are no longer in or on the object or the spell is dismissed; otherwise, the object is moved to the extent of the spell’s range when you cast the spell.  STARVATION  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes Your stomach growls as you near completionofthespell.Asyoudeclarethetargetof the spell, your hunger disappears, but you notewithsatisfactionthatyourtargetseems wracked with pain. You inﬂict wracking hunger pangs on the target creature. It must make a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of nonlethal damage per caster level (maximum 10d6) and become fatigued. A creature that makes a successful save takes half damage and is not fatigued by the spell. A fatigued creature becomes exhausted when doing anything that causes the creature to become fatigued (such as dangerous environmental temperatures or ending a barbarian rage). A fatigued creature that fails its saving throw against starvation takes nonlethal damage as normal and becomes exhausted. Material Component: A piece of spoiled food.  STEELDANCE  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: Two swords or daggers Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  206  You place the two daggers in your outstretchedpalmandcastthespell.Theyrise from your hands, glowing with a dim blue radiance.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  The two daggers hover about you, attacking foes that come near. On your turn, each blade can make an attack at an adjacent opponent, with an attack bonus equal to your caster level + your relevant ability modiﬁer. The damage they deal is equal to the normal weapon damage (1d4 for daggers) + your ability modiﬁer (Intelligence for wizards and Charisma for sorcerers). The weapons are treated as magic for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Your blades can be attacked with sunder or disarm attempts as if you were wielding them, and they use the above attack bonus to resolve such situations. Disarming a weapon under the effect of steeldance ends the spell for that weapon. Focus: Two bladed weapons, such as daggers or longswords.  Yourﬁngersexudeaslightlyviscoussecretion and become more nimble. When touched together, your ﬁngertips stick slightly.  STICK  Transmutation Level: Bard 0, sorcerer/wizard 0 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Nonmagical, unattended object weighing up to 5 lb. Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Lacking someone to hold the item where you need it, you mutter and wave your handinasimplegesturebeforestickingthe item in place. Stick afﬁxes one object weighing up to 5 pounds to another object. The two items can be separated with even a small amount of force, such as a wind stronger than 10 mph, a mage hand or unseen servant spell, or a move action by any corporeal creature (which provokes attacks of opportunity). Material Component: A bit of dried glue.  STICKY FINGERS Transmutation Level: Assassin 1, bard 1 Components: S  This spell grants you a +10 bonus on Sleight of Hand checks.  STICKY SADDLE  Transmutation Level: Paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) A colorless glow surrounds you and your mountforaninstant.Whentheglowfades, you feel more attentive to the movements of your mount even while an unseen force holds you fast to it. This spell “glues” you to your mount. It becomes impossible for you to fall or be thrown off your mount. Prying you from the saddle requires a DC 20 Strength check, and you gain a +10 bonus on Ride checks related to staying in the saddle. The spell must be cast after you are seated on your mount. If you are not seated on your mount when the spell is cast, the spell fails. If the spell is cast while you are riding bareback, you are “stuck” to the mount’s back. Otherwise, you are merely stuck to the saddle, but the saddle is attached to the mount normally. If you are knocked unconscious while this spell is in effect, you automatically remain in the saddle. The spell can be dismissed as an immediate action, and it does not impede the rider from making a soft fall if the mount is dropped in battle.  STING RAY  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level  Saving Throw: Will partial Spell Resistance: Yes From your outstretched hand leaps forth a rayofglitteringenergyapparentlycomposed ofcountlessminusculewrithinginsects.The humofminutechitinousbodiesscrambling over one another ﬁlls the air.  Necromancy [Air] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature that breathes air Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  Transmutation Level: Cleric 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Astheechoesofyourspellcastingdie,your ﬂesh begins to stiffen and turn gray, gaining the rough texture and consistency of stone. This spell transforms your body into living stone, which grants you several powerful resistances and abilities. You gain damage reduction 10/adamantine. You are immune to blindness,  Sticky saddle gives a caster the ability to stay in the saddle, no matter how her mount moves  Illus. by J. Engle  With a clenched ﬁst, you make a tugging motion toward your target. A transparent, barely perceptible hand appears to plunge into your target’s mouth.  STONE BODY  CHAPTER 1  STOLEN BREATH  With this spell, you steal all the air from the subject’s lungs, causing it to suffer a momentary respiratory crisis. It can take shallow breaths and act normally but is considered sickened for 1 minute. At any time during this minute, the subject can take a full-round action to get its wind back, ending the condition. Focus: A stoppered glass vial. SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. When this ray successfully strikes, it creates a sensation of many tiny insects biting and crawling on the victim’s body. The target can attempt a Will save each round to shake off the effect. Until the spell is shrugged off, the victim is hampered by the unsettling feeling of all the stinging and biting, and is able to perform only a single move or standard action each round. The victim also takes a –2 penalty to AC. In addition, if the victim attempts to cast a spell, it must succeed on a Concentration check with a DC equal to the sting ray’s DC + the level of the spell the subject is attempting to cast. For example, if a 6th-level sorcerer with a Charisma score of 16 casts sting ray on a wizard casting a ﬁreball, the  Concentration check DC is 19 (16 [sting ray DC] + 3 [ﬁreball spell level]). A successful Will save negates the effect restricting the subject’s action to one move or one standard action each round, nor does the subject need to make a Concentration check each time it wishes to cast a spell. However, the subject still takes the penalty to AC for the duration of the spell with a successful save. Material Component: Four dried stinging insects (bees, wasps, and so on).  207  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  extra damage from critical hits, ability score damage, deafness, disease, drowning, poison, stunning, and all spells or attacks that affect your physiology or respiration, because you have no physiology or respiration while this spell is in effect. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Strength, but you take a –4 penalty to Dexterity (minimum Dexterity 1). Your speed is reduced to one-half normal, and your weight increases by a factor of three. If you are targeted with transmute rock to mud, you are slowed for 2d6 rounds with no saving throw. A transmute mud to rock heals you of all your lost hit points. A stone to ﬂesh spell cast on you automatically ends this spell. Arcane Material Component: A small piece of stone that was once part of a stone golem, a greater earth elemental, or a castle’s outer wall.  Illus. by J. Thomas  STONE BONES  Transmutation Level: Cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Corporeal undead creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Abriefﬂashengulfsyourally,andthrough his ﬂesh you can see his skeleton. The skeleton glows a foggy gray for a moment, thickening with eldritch power, then all is as it was before. You cause the skeleton of the target corporeal undead to become thicker and as strong as stone. This gives the subject a +3 enhancement bonus to its existing natural armor. Arcane Focus: A miniature skull carved of granite.  STONE SHAPE, GREATER  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Cleric 5, druid 5, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Target: Stone or stone objects touched, up to 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./ level  208  Stone shatter sends a heartrendingly pure note to the center of any stone  You mutter the ancient words, and your hands glow yellow where they touch the stone. Where you touch, the stone seems as soft as clay. This spell functions like stone shape (PH 284), except that it affects a much larger quantity of stone.  STONE SHATTER Evocation [Sonic] Level: Bard 4 Components: V, S  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./level) Target: One stone object or creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None or Fortitude half; see text Spell Resistance: No You call up energies from deep within you andutteraperfectnote.Thestonerocksasit is struck, and cracks appear in its form. You aim a single note of perfect pitch toward an unattended stone object  weighing no more than 2 pounds per caster level, or toward a stone creature, causing it to shatter. A stone object is destroyed, whereas a stone creature (of any weight) takes 1d6 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d6), with a Fortitude save for half damage.  STONE SPHERE  You create a smoothly polished, 5-footdiameter sphere of stone that moves under your control at a speed of 30 feet. A stone sphere has AC 5, hardness 8, and 500 hit points. In the round when you cast the spell, the stone sphere appears at the spot you designate within the spell’s range, and you can direct its movement as a free action. In subsequent rounds, you must actively direct the stone sphere in order to move it; otherwise, it remains motionless. Directing the movement of a stone sphere in any round after its initial appearance requires a move action. If you move a stone sphere into a square occupied by an enemy, it stops moving and deals 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 5d6) to every creature in that square. A successful Reﬂex save negates the damage. Material Component: A smooth sphere of marble 1 inch in diameter.  STONE SPIDERS  Transmutation Level: Spider 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: Three pebbles, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  This spell transforms three pebbles into stone constructs that resemble monstrous spiders. The constructs can be any size from Tiny to Huge as you decide, but all the constructs you create must be the same size. The constructs have the same statistics as monstrous spiders (MM 288) of the appropriate size, except as noted here. • Their natural armor bonus increases by 6. • They have damage reduction 10/ magic. • Their poison has a Fortitude save DC of 10 + 1/2 your caster level + your Wis modiﬁer. Initial and secondary damage is 1d3 points of Strength damage. If the constructs can hear your commands, you can direct them not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform other actions. Otherwise, they simply attack your enemies to the best of their ability.  STONEHOLD  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: One 10-ft. square/level Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes (object) When the energy of this spell bursts forth, the ground erupts with multiple humansizedarmsmadeofsolidrock.Asyouﬁnish casting, they retreat beneath the stone surface, a trap set for future trespassers. This spell conjures thick stony arms that spring forth from any rock or stone formation whenever anyone passes near it. Each 10-foot square in the spell’s area contains one stone arm. Any creature that enters the area of the spell is immobilized by the arms unless it succeeds on a Reﬂex save.  CHAPTER 1  You toss the marble in the air, and it vanishes as you speak the words of the spell. A largerversionofthemarble,ﬁvefeetacross, appears in the hallway and bears down on your foe.  Youimbuethreesmallstoneswithmagical power,causingthemtotwistandgrowinto large stone spiders.  Such a creature is rooted in place and unable to move. It can take actions normally; it just can’t move from the space it currently occupies. Held creatures take 1d6+5 points of damage each round, at the beginning of your turn. Creatures that succeed on the Reﬂex save can move through the area normally. Creatures that start their turn in the affected area must attempt another Reﬂex save or be affected by the spell. A held creature can attempt a DC 20 Strength check or a DC 25 Escape Artist check to break free, and can also break free by dealing enough damage to destroy the arm. An arm has AC 15, hardness 8, and 15 hit points. Before they attack, the arms remain beneath the surface of the stone. They can be discovered (but not disarmed) as a magic trap can be.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One 5-ft.-diameter stone sphere Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  STONY GRASP  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Effect: Animated stone arm Duration: 1 round/level By thrusting your arm downward, you complete the casting of the spell. Nearby, a roughly formed arm about the size of a human erupts from the ground and grasps at the air. This spell functions like earthen grasp (page 76), except as noted here. The stony arm can appear from any natural surface, including unworked rock, earth, mud, grass, or sand. The stone arm has AC 18, hardness 8, and 4 hit points per caster level. Material Component: A miniature hand sculpted from stone.  STORM OF ELEMENTAL FURY  Conjuration (Summoning) Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: 40-ft.-radius storm cloud, 200 ft. above the ground Duration: 4 rounds Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  209  Illus. by W. O’Connor  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  With a thunderous boom, a black storm cloud appears over your enemies, striking them with a terrifying combination of effects from the Elemental Planes. Each round, the storm generates one of the following effects, starting with the ﬁrst effect, then progressing to the second, until it has run its 4-round course. 1st Round: A storm of elemental fury buffets the area immediately beneath it with a whirling windstorm (DMG 94–95). Ranged attacks within the area of the storm are impossible, and Small or smaller creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be blown away. Medium creatures must make their Fortitude save or be knocked prone, and Large or larger creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save to move that round. Flying creatures that fail their saves are instead blown in a random direction, traveling 1d6×5 feet if Large or larger, 1d6×10 feet if Medium, and 2d6×10 feet if Small or smaller. Spells cast within the area are disrupted unless the caster succeeds on a Concentration check against a DC equal to thestormofelementalfury’ssaveDC + the level of the spell the caster is trying to cast. 2nd Round: Chunks of rock fall from the sky, dealing 5d6 points of damage (no save) to all creatures in the storm. 3rd Round: A deluge of rain extinguishes unprotected ﬂames and perhaps protected ones as well (50% chance). The torrential downpour reduces visibility to 5 feet and cuts movement in half. 4th Round: Flame pelts the area beneath the storm cloud, dealing 1d6 points of ﬁre damage per caster level (maximum 15d6) (Reﬂex half).  STORM TOWER  210  Abjuration [Air] Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 100 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Saving Throw: Fortitude negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youformanenormoustowerofdark,swirling storm clouds and howling wind.  succeed on a Fortitude saving throw to enter; otherwise, they are checked at the edge. Anyone within a storm tower has concealment relative to those outside the tower. The howling winds of a storm tower also apply a –10 penalty on Listen checks made within 50 feet of it (including all those made inside the tower).  STORMRAGE  Transmutation [Electricity] Level: Cleric 8, druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level (D)  You harness the powers of wind andstormtomove,protectyourself, and attack.  Storm tower gives a druid respite from foes  A storm tower absorbs any electricity damage dealt to those within it. Magic missiles cannot be cast into, out of, or within a storm tower. The storm tower is composed of windstorm-strength winds (DMG 95), making ranged attacks impossible within it, though it has no effect on the movement of creatures within it. However, only Gargantuan or Colossal creatures can pass through the outer edge of the storm tower; all creatures of smaller size must  You can ﬂy at a speed of 40 feet, and you gain immunity to thrown weapons and projectile ranged attacks. You are completely unaffected by natural or magical wind, easily able to hold your position and not subject to other adverse effects of extreme wind. Finally, you can discharge a bolt of electricity from your eyes once per round. You enemies’ spell resistance applies to these lightning attacks. Doing this is a standard action that does not provoke attacks of opportunity, has a range of 100 feet, and requires a ranged touch attack. You gain a +3 bonus on the attack roll if the opponent is wearing metal armor, made out of metal, or carrying a lot of metal. If you hit, the bolt deals 1d6 points of electricity damage per two caster levels (maximum 10d6), with no saving throw allowed.  STRATEGIC CHARGE Abjuration Level: Blackguard 1, paladin 1 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  A red nimbus surrounds you as you move smoothly across the crowded battleﬁeld.  You gain the beneﬁt of the Mobility feat (PH 98), even if you not meet the prerequisites. You do not have to be charging to gain this beneﬁt.  STRENGTH OF STONE  The spell grants you a +8 enhancement bonus to Strength. The spell ends instantly if you lose contact with the ground. This means you cannot jump, tumble, charge, run, or move more than your speed in a round (because these acts cause both of your feet to leave the ground) without breaking the spell. A natural stone wall or ceiling counts as the ground for the purpose of this spell (so you could climb a cavern wall and not lose the spell).  STUN RAY  Conjuration (Creation) [Electricity] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: Ray Duration: 1d4+1 rounds; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes A quick jolt of electricity darts from your raised hand. The slight smell of ozone lingers afterward. You blast an enemy with a scintillating ray of electricity. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. The target is stunned for 1d4+1 rounds by the ray of electricity. If the subject makes a successful Fortitude save, it is stunned for only 1 round. Creatures that have immunity to electricity are not affected by this spell. Material Component: A coiled copper wire.  Youbreatheout,andyourbreathweaponis mixedwithheavy,bluespheresofmagical energy. Those that survive your onslaught are left standing but stunned. For this spell to function, you must have a breath weapon that deals hit point damage, either as a supernatural ability or as the result of casting a spell such as dragon breath (page 73). When you successfully cast this spell, you imbue your breath weapon with concussive force that can stun those caught in its area. Creatures that take damage from the breath weapon must make successful Fortitude saves (DC equal to your breath weapon save DC) or be stunned for 1 round.  STUNNING BREATH, GREATER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8  This spell functions like stunning breath, except that creatures that fail their Fortitude saves are stunned for 2d4 rounds.  SUBMERGE SHIP  Evocation [Water] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Ship touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Holding forth a miniature rudder, you touchthetargetship.Immediatelyyoufeel connectedtoit,knowingtheintricatedetails of its construction. You sense an invisible aura surrounding the ship and permeatingitseveryspace.Althoughitseemstobe riding lower in the water than its weight wouldsuggest,youinstinctivelyknowthat you can control its every movement.  CHAPTER 1  You call upon the fortitude of the powers ofgood,andyourﬂeshturns anivory-gray hue as you draw power up through the earth itself.  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: Your breath weapon Duration: Instantaneous  You grant the ship touched a swim speed of 60 feet and the ability to move beneath the surface of the water. You can control the ship’s speed and direction as a free action. All interior spaces of the ship remain dry even if a doorway or porthole is open while the ship is underwater. Any creature aboard the ship when the spell is cast can move about the ship with ease (including climbing and jumping) as if it were aﬂoat on a calm sea. Such creatures can breathe water for the duration of the spell as long as they remain within 10 feet of the ship. External forces, such as a storm or an angry dragon, can still jostle the ship and cause it to shake and possibly knock passengers and objects from it, but nothing falls from the ship as a result of your direction of its movement. You can transfer control of the ship to another individual by giving that individual the miniature rudder you used as a focus to cast the spell. If the focus is ever lost or becomes unattended, the spell’s duration expires. Once the spell ends (either because the duration expired, the focus was lost or became unattended, or the magic was successfully dispelled), the magic lingers for 1 additional round per caster level. During this time, the ship ascends toward the water’s surface at a rate of 60 feet per round. If the ship is still underwater when this additional time runs out, it immediately sinks, and its passengers risk drowning. Focus: A miniature wooden rudder inlaid with silver, worth 2,500 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Paladin 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round  STUNNING BREATH  SUBVERT PLANAR ESSENCE  Transmutation Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Takingcommandoftheforcesthatconnect your plane to others, you reach out with your will and deaden an area to the inﬂuence of the Outer Planes on its natives.  211  The submerge ship spell allows everyone to travel beneath the waves  You point your ﬁnger upward and utter a curt shout. Immediately, a razor-sharp stalagmiteburstsfromthegroundtoimpale your foe. This spell creates a stalagmite about 1 foot wide at its base and up to 10 feet tall. If it encounters a ceiling before it reaches full size, it stops growing. The stalagmite grows from the ground under the target creature and shoots upward. An airborne creature within 10 feet of the ground gains a +4 bonus on its saving throw, and airborne creatures more than 10 feet above the ground cannot be harmed by this spell. The stalagmite deals 1d6 points of piercing damage per caster level (maximum 10d6). In addition, a target that  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Evil] Level: Cleric 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned babau demon Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No A puff of smoke erupts from the ground, smellingofbrimstoneandburningcorpses. From the smoke strides the leathery form of a babau demon. This spell summons a babau demon (MM 40) from the Inﬁnite Layers of the Abyss. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. A summoned creature cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature, nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities.  SUMMON BEARDED DEVIL  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil, Lawful] Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF  Aﬁreﬂaresfromtheground,thensubsides immediately. In the place of the ﬁrst is the hunchbackedformofabarbazu,brandishing a saw-toothed glaive. This spell summons a bearded devil (MM 52) from the Nine Hells of Baator. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. A summoned creature cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature, nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities.  SUMMON BRALANI ELADRIN  Conjuration (Summoning) [Chaotic, Good] Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned bralani eladrin Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: No  SUMMON BABAU DEMON  Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned bearded devil Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by J. Thomas  SUDDEN STALAGMITE  fails to make a saving throw against this spell and takes damage from it is impaled on the stalagmite and cannot move from its current location until it makes a DC 15 Escape Artist check. The stalagmite can be removed in other ways as well, such as with a stone shape spell. The victim can break free with a DC 25 Strength check, although doing this deals it 3d6 points of slashing damage. A creature’s damage reduction, if any, applies to the damage from this spell. The damage from sudden stalagmite is treated as piercing for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Outsiders within the emanation of a subvert planar essence spell ﬁnd their connection disrupted with the planar forces that created them. Outsiders that fail their saves have their damage reduction and spell resistance each reduced by 10. For example, a barbed devil subject to subvert planar essence would have no damage reduction and spell resistance 13, while a pit ﬁend would have damage reduction 5/good and silver, and spell resistance 22. An outsider attempts a Fortitude save and checks spell resistance when it ﬁrst enter the spell’s area. If it makes the save or the spell fails to overcome its spell resistance, that creature is thereafter unaffected by this casting of subvert planar essence and can enter and exit the spell area without making further saves. Outsiders that fail their saves and have their spell resistance overcome by the spell are affected as long as they remain within the spell’s area, and they are automatically affected if they leave and reenter the area. Arcane Material Component: A tuning fork made from cold iron.  A glowing blue seal appear on the ground and then subsides immediately. When it has vanished entirely, a bralani eladrin appears. This spell summons a bralani eladrin (MM 93) from the Olympian Glades of Arborea. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action.  213  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SUMMON ELEMENTAL MONOLITH  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Cleric 9, druid 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: One summoned elemental monolith Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You call into being a gigantic, roughly humanoid creature composed entirely of elementalmatter.Thecreatureimmediately attacks a nearby enemy. You conjure a tremendously powerful creature known as an elemental monolith (Complete Arcane 156). It appears at the spot you designate and acts immediately on your turn, attacking your opponents to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. If you speak the elemental monolith’s language and are close enough to communicate with it, you can direct it not to attack, to attack particular enemies, or to perform other actions. A monolith can’t be summoned into an environment hostile to it in any way (for example, you couldn’t summon a ﬁre monolith underwater or an earth monolith high in midair). When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, earth, ﬁre, or water creature, it becomes a spell of that type. Material Component: A gem worth 100 gp—aquamarine for air, tourmaline for earth, garnet for ﬁre, or pearl for water.  SUMMON ELEMENTITE SWARM  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned elementite swarm Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round  214  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You summon what looks like a host of smallpebbles,whichimmediatelydescend upon your foes. This spell summons an elementite swarm (Planar Handbook 114)—air, earth, ﬁre, or water, at your option— from the appropriate Elemental Plane. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, earth, ﬁre, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.  SUMMON ELYSIAN THRUSH  Conjuration (Summoning) [Good] Level: Bard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned Elysian thrush Duration: 8 hours Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You evoke the powers of Elysium and of song, and the bird responds. It is about two feet long, with a resplendent orange breast and multicolored feathers. It settles upon a branch and begins to sweetly warble. This spell summons an Elysian thrush (Planar Handbook 118), a birdlike creature native to the Blessed Fields of Elysium. The creature has no signiﬁcant combat utility, but its song accelerates the natural healing rate of living creatures. Those within 30 feet who listen to the thrush’s song while resting recover at twice the normal natural healing rate.  SUMMON GREATER ELEMENTAL  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF  Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned elemental Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You call upon the powers of nature, and they respond to your command. A huge wavewellsupbeforeyou,darkeyeswithin it regarding you from beneath the water. You point at the boat in the bay, and say, “Sink it.” This spell summons a greater elemental (MM 96–100)—air, earth, ﬁre, or water, at your option—from the appropriate Elemental Plane. The greater elemental appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. When you use a summoning spell to summon an air, earth, ﬁre, or water creature, it is a spell of that type.  SUMMON HOUND ARCHON  Conjuration (Summoning) [Good, Lawful] Level: Cleric 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned hound archon Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level + 1 round Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You invoke the powers of good and law, and a brilliant beam stabs from the heavens above. Out of that beam strides a red-ﬂeshed, dog-headed humanoid with a greatsword. This spell summons a hound archon (MM 16) from the Seven Mounting Heavens of Celestia. It appears where you designate and acts immediately, on your turn. It understands your speech (regardless of your language), and it follows your commands to the best of its  ability. You must concentrate to maintain the spell’s effect, but commanding the creature is a free action. A summoned creature cannot summon or otherwise conjure another creature, nor can it use any teleportation or planar travel abilities.  SUMMON UNDEAD II  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 2, cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  SUMMON UNDEAD I  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  CHAPTER 1  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 3rd-level list, two undead of the same kind from the 2nd-level list, or four undead of the same kind from the 1st-level list.  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 1, cleric 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One summoned creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  SUMMON UNDEAD IV  Summon undead puts control of undead minions in the hands of even apprentice wizards  This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 2nd-level list or two undead of the same kind from the 1st-level list.  pqqqqqqqqqqqqrs  SUMMON UNDEAD LISTS  1st Level: Human warrior skeleton (MM 226), kobold zombie (MM 266) 2nd Level: Owlbear skeleton (MM 226), bugbear zombie (MM 267). 3rd Level: Ghoul (MM 118), troll skeleton (MM 227), ogre zombie (MM 267). 4th Level: Allip (MM 10), ghast (MM 119), wyvern zombie (MM 267). 5th Level: Mummy (MM 190), shadow (MM 221), vampire spawn (MM 253), wight (MM 255).  pqqqqqqqqqqqqrs  This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 4th-level list, two undead of the same kind from the 3rd-level list, or four undead of the same kind from a lower-level list.  Illus. by R. Spears  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Blackguard 4, cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart  The undead you summon appear in a burst of smoke and fog. The vapor swiftly dissipates, but you can’t shake the impression of screaming faces in the cloud’s tendrils. This spell functions like summonmonsterI(PH285), except that you summon an undead creature. Summon undead I conjures one of the creatures from the 1st-level list in the accompanying sidebar. You choose which creature to summon, and you can change that choice each time you cast the spell. Summoned undead do not count toward the total Hit Dice of undead that you can control with animate dead or the other command undead abilities. No undead creature you summon can have more Hit Dice than your caster level +1. Focus: A tiny bag, a small (not lit) candle, and a carved bone from any humanoid.  SUMMON UNDEAD III  SUMMON UNDEAD V  Conjuration (Summoning) [Evil] Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Effect: One or more summoned creatures, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart This spell functions like summon undead I, except that you can summon one undead from the 5th-level list, two undead of the same kind from the 4thlevel list, or four undead of the same kind from a lower-level list.  SUPERIOR (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with superior is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a  215  superior spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  SUPPRESS BREATH WEAPON  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature that has a breath weapon Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: No You shout out the words of this spell and the creature’s throat constricts, a blue ring of runes visible around its neck. The subject of this spell cannot use its breath weapon for the duration of the spell.  SUPPRESS GLYPH  Abjuration Level: Cleric 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 100 ft. Area: 100-ft.-radius burst centered on you. Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Will negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) You cast the spell, and a dancing crown of ruby runes orbits your head brieﬂy.  216  You gain an enhanced awareness of magical writing within range. Magical writing such as a glyph of warding, explosiverunes,sepiasnakesigil,orsymbol is covered by a blue nimbus of light (which sheds light equal to a candle). This effect reveals the location of the writing without triggering it. For every source of magical writing, you can make a dispel check (1d20 + your caster level, maximum +10) against a DC equal to 11 + the writing’s caster level. If you are successful, the magical writing is suppressed for 1 minute per caster level. You and other creatures could then read a book warded by explosive runes, or open a drawer guarded  by a glyph of warding, or pass through a doorway protected by a symbol without effect. This spell covers and negates any active or triggered magical writing (such as a quickly scribed symbol of fear or a triggered symbol of death), although creatures that have already succumbed to the effect of the writing are unaffected. Once this spell ends, all magical writing in the area can be triggered normally, and active or triggered writings resume their function if they have any duration left.  SUREFOOT  Abjuration Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level You speak a few words and motion toward your feet, which begin to glow with a green hue. Your steps are sure and true, even on the narrowest ledges. You gain a +10 competence bonus on Balance, Climb, Jump, and Tumble checks. In addition, you do not lose your Dexterity bonus to AC when balancing or climbing.  SUREFOOTED STRIDE Transmutation Level: Bard 2, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Youbecomeassurefootedasanymountain goat, and the power of your magic makes walking in treacherous terrain child’s play. You can move through difﬁcult terrain (PH 163) at full speed for the duration of this spell, and you can even run, charge, and tumble through such terrain as though it were clear terrain. You also gain a +2 competence bonus on Climb checks.  SUREFOOTED STRIDE, MASS  Transmutation Level: Bard 5, druid 4, ranger 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart This spell functions like surefooted stride, except as noted here.  SUSPENDED SILENCE  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One object Duration: 24 hours or until discharged, then 6 rounds; see text Saving Throw: None (object) Spell Resistance: No (object) You sprinkle the object with a handful of gem dust, and the last words of your spell fade like they are being dragged into a hole. Then the normal sounds of the world reestablishthemselves,butthespellwithin is set to be unleashed later. When you touch the object and give the command word you designate, the object becomes the subject of a silence spell. The effect of the silence spell moves with the object and lasts for 6 rounds. Material Component: A feather and a handful of gem dust worth 50 gp.  SWAMP LUNG  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One living creature with a respiratory system Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: No You take a deep breath and feel the power of the spell surround you. Choosing your target, you unleash the spell’s energy. A sea-green halo forms around your target’s head.Momentslater,thetargetedcreature begins coughing up water.  Conjuration (Teleportation) Level: Druid 5, ranger 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level or until expended; see text Instinctively, you know the depth of the nearest pool of water, as well as other pools nearbyofasimilardepth.Inyourmind’seye you see the pools connected to one another magically, as if each were a doorway with a tunnel linking it to all the others. This spell functions like tree stride (PH 296), but it is used for diving into pools of water rather than trees. Each pool must be at least 1 foot deep, and the exit pool of water must be similar in depth to the entry pool (within 1 foot). Unlike with tree stride, each jump has a maximum range of 500 feet. All other effects and limitations are the same.  SWIFT (SPELL NAME)  Any spell whose name begins with swift is alphabetized in this chapter according to the second word of the spell name. Thus, the description of a swift spell appears near the description of the spell on which it is based, unless that spell appears in the Player’s Handbook.  SWIM  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature  Making the sound of crashing waves with your throat completes the spell. With a wave of your hand, your subject seems more streamlined, with a hint of webbed appendages. This spell gives the recipient a swim speed of 30 feet (although not the ability to breathe water or hold one’s breath beyond normal limits). As long as the creature isn’t carrying more than a light load, it can swim without making Swim checks. It also gains a +8 bonus on any Swim checks to perform special actions or avoid hazards, though it still takes the normal penalty for weight carried (–1 per 5 pounds). The recipient can choose to take 10 on Swim checks, even if rushed or threatened, and can use the run action while swimming if it swims in a straight line. If the creature is carrying more than a light load, it must make Swim checks to move (taking the normal penalty for weight carried), but all other beneﬁts of the spell still apply. Material Component: A goldﬁsh scale.  SWIM, MASS  Transmutation [Water] Level: Druid 4 Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Choosing carefully the recipients of your spell, you cause a blue-green glow to emanate from each one. Moments later, the emanation fades, leaving the chosen creatureslookingmorelithebutwithmore robust limbs. The spell functions like swim, except that it affects multiple creatures.  SWORD OF DARKNESS Necromancy [Evil] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Effect: Black blade of negative energy  You shatter the sword in your hand against a stone, bringing into being a similar weapon made entirely of black energy. As soon as it forms, the black blade attacks.  This spell functions like sword of deception (see below), except that you cause a black blade of pure negative energy to appear and attack opponents at a distance, as directed by you. Instead of dealing damage, a sword of darkness bestows one negative level on each successful hit against a living creature, threatens a critical hit on a roll of 19–20, and bestows two negative levels on a critical hit. Negative levels usually have a chance of permanently draining the subject’s levels, but the negative levels from sword of darkness don’t last long enough to do so. However, if the subject gains at least as many negative levels as it has Hit Dice, it dies. If the sword strikes an undead creature, it grants that creature 5 temporary hit points per two caster levels (maximum 25 temporary hit points) that last for up to 1 hour. Material Component: A bastard sword or longsword, which is shattered against a stone while casting the spell.  CHAPTER 1  SWAMP STRIDE  Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell causes stagnant swamp water to ﬂood the target’s lungs. If the target is unable to breathe water, it must cough it out. If it makes the save, then this expulsion is done with little effort. If it fails the save, the creature falls prone in a coughing ﬁt for 1d6 rounds and is helpless during that time. Furthermore, on a failed save, the subject contracts ﬁlth fever (DMG 292). Creatures able to breathe water must make the Fortitude save in order to avoid the disease, but are otherwise unaffected.  SWORD OF DECEPTION  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Pale green blade of force Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Swinging a miniature replica of a sword as if it were real, you bring into being a full-sized representation of your replica madeentirelyofpalegreenforce.Theblade immediately attacks your enemy. You cause a blade of pale green force to appear and strike the opponent you designate, starting with one attack in the round when the spell is cast and continuing each round thereafter. Though it makes regular melee attacks, the sword strikes as a spell, not a weapon (and so can strike incorporeal creatures). A sword of deception always strikes from your direction, and so it can’t be used to ﬂank with your attacks, but it could ﬂank with your allies. The blade attacks with a base attack bonus equal to your caster level, dealing 1d8 points of damage per hit and threatening a critical hit on a roll of 19–20. In addition, each successful hit provides a  217  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  –2 penalty on the target’s next saving throw roll (–4 on a successful critical hit). This penalty is cumulative (to a maximum of –5 on a single creature) and lasts until the creature is forced to make a saving throw in a dangerous situation or receives the beneﬁt of a remove curse spell. Each round, a sword of deception continues to attack the previous round’s target unless you use a standard action to switch it to a new target within range. In any round when the weapon switches targets, it gets one attack as a standard action (as it does in the round when the spell is cast). The weapon can make multiple attack rolls against a single target with a full attack action if its base attack bonus permits. A sword of deception cannot be attacked or damaged (though it can be dispelled as any other spell). If an attacked creature has spell resistance, make a caster level check the ﬁrst time the sword attacks. If the check is successful, the sword can attack that creature with normal effect for the duration of the spell. If not, the sword of deception is dispelled. If the target goes beyond the spell range or out of your sight, the sword of deception returns to you and hovers. Focus: A miniature replica of a sword and a set of loaded dice.  SYMBOL OF SPELL LOSS Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 0 ft.; see text Effect: One symbol Duration: See text Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: No  Youtracethesymbolandfeelapullasittugs against the magical energy in your mind.  218  This spell functions like symbol of death (PH 289), except that when it is triggered, the symbol begins to attack the minds of spellcasters within 60 feet. Each must attempt a Will saving throw every round they are within range, at the beginning of their turn. Failure means that the highest-level spell prepared by the spellcaster (or highest-level spell slot, if the character casts spells spontaneously) is lost for  the day. The symbol remains active for 10 minutes per level or until it has erased ﬁfty levels of spells. The symbol attacks creatures with spell-like abilities as if they had spells, consuming a daily use of the highest-level ability the creature possesses, or suppressing an ability usable at will for 1 round.  SYMPHONIC NIGHTMARE  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 6, cleric 7, sorcerer/ wizard 7 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch; see text Target: Living creature touched; see text Duration: 24 hours/level (D) Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes A dark and ominous aura forms around youasyoucompletethespell.Distantchords of a harsh and terrible symphony—as if multipleorchestrasplayeddifferentpieces simultaneously—echocontinuouslyinthe air as you reach for your victim. A creature targeted by this spell loses the ability to dream during sleep or rest. Rather, in place of dreams, the subject’s slumbering mind is ﬁlled with the sounds of a discordant orchestra. After the victim’s ﬁrst attempt to sleep, it incurs a –2 penalty on Wisdom-based skill checks. This penalty persists as long as the symphonic nightmare maintains its hold. This spell affects all creatures that sleep or enter sleeplike trances, although creatures without the need to sleep are effectively immune. In addition, the creature’s sleep is now haunted. It can no longer gain complete rest from sleeping or resting. The subject does not regain hit points or heal ability damage naturally, nor is it able to prepare spells if doing so requires a full night’s rest. The creature is, however, now immune to the dream and nightmare spells, as well as to other effects that cause nightmares (such as the night hag’s dream haunting ability). You can lift the effect of this curse at will, but it is otherwise difﬁcult to  remove a symphonic nightmare before its duration expires. A remove curse cast at a higher caster level than the symphonic nightmare spell removes it, as does a successful break enchantment. Otherwise, a wish or miracle is required to lift the curse. This spell can also be cast on a creature you are scrying, or on a creature distant from you if you hold something the creature carried within the past 24 hours. Focus: A small statue of an opened skull, within which is arranged a miniature orchestra. The quality of this component must be extraordinary, and it carries a value of 1,000 gp.  SYNOSTODWEOMER Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: One of your spells Duration: 1 round  You cast this spell, and you picture a forge in your mind. You think of the forge as you cast your next spell, but that spell does not manifest. Instead, your hands glow with a golden curative radiance. You channel the spell energy from a spell you know into healing magic. After you cast this spell, the next spell you cast in the same round is converted to positive energy. When you cast the second spell, you touch yourself or another creature, curing 1d8 points of damage for every spell level of the spell you cast. If the spell you cast was prepared with a metamagic feat, you use the level of the spell slot the spell occupied.  TACTICAL PRECISION  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  You hold aloft a toy soldier and shake it at your allies, calling them to arms as you do so. The toy soldier dissipates, but you feel a connection to your allies as though you couldheareachonewhisperingherintended actions before she performed them.  Divination Level: Bard 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: Ray Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No From your clenched ﬁst you produce a luminousray.Theraypulsatesbetweenthe target creature and you. The ray acts as a rangeﬁnder for you and any allies. You must succeed on a ranged touch attack with the ray to strike a target. It provides a +1 insight bonus per three caster levels on ranged attacks directed at the subject for the duration of the spell. Your allies need not see you, but they must be able to see the ray. You can otherwise act normally for the duration of the spell. Allies who can see the target of the ray receive the bonus even if you lose line of sight to the target. Focus: A small metal or stone tube.  TELEPATHIC AURA  Divination Level: Paladin 4 Components: S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 100 ft. Area: 100-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  You can mentally communicate with all allies within range, though this is one-way communication. (You can send thoughts, but you cannot receive thoughts in response.) Anything you choose to send is received by all creatures you perceive as allies within the emanation (you cannot send thoughts only to certain allies), and they all understand you regardless of language. Allies with Intelligence scores lower than 3 understand basic commands but not complex information (“Attack” is understood, but “Ignore the foot soldiers and attack the spellcasters” gets the same reaction as “Attack”).  TELEPATHIC BOND, LESSER  Divination [Mind-Affecting] Level: Mind 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: You and one willing creature within 30 ft. Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No As you send your thoughts outward, your mindbrushesagainsttheconsciousnessof yourfriendanditwelcomesyou,forminga bond that no distance can break. You forge a telepathic bond with another creature with an Intelligence score of 6 or higher. You can communicate telepathically through the bond regardless of language. No special power or inﬂuence is established as a result of the bond. Once the bond is formed, it works over any distance (although not from one plane to another).  THORNSKIN  Transmutation Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M  You push a thorn against your skin to completethespell.Insteadofpiercingyour skin, the thorn melds into it. An instant later, hundreds of similar thorns sprout all over your body. Your skin sprouts thorns when this spell is cast, increasing the damage you deal with an unarmed strike and making you difﬁcult to grab. As well as dealing lethal damage with your unarmed strikes (if you don’t already do so), you deal an extra 1d6 points of piercing damage (so that a human under the effect of thornskin would deal 1d3 points of bludgeoning damage + 1d6 points of piercing damage with an unarmed strike). In addition, any creature that hits you with a natural weapon or unarmed strike (including all successful grapple checks) takes 5 points of piercing damage. A creature’s damage reduction, if any, applies to the damage from this spell. The damage from thornskin is treated as piercing for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. Material Component: A thorn.  CHAPTER 1  TARGETING RAY  You make a silent gesture with your holy symbol and think about your fellowship with your companions. In a moment, they all look up as if someone called their names.  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  When you cast this spell, you grant your allies greater insight into one another’s actions, allowing them to better coordinate their attacks. If two affected allies ﬂank the same creature, each gains a +2 insight bonus on melee attack rolls and deals an extra 1d6 points of damage against the ﬂanked creature. Creatures not subject to extra damage from sneak attacks are immune to this extra damage. Material Component: A toy soldier.  Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  THUNDERHEAD  Evocation [Electricity] Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Black mist forms near the ground and sweeps upward to join a small cloud formingabovethecreatureyoudesignateasyour target. Miniature peals of thunder erupt from the cloud. Thunderhead creates a small thundercloud over the subject’s head. The cloud moves with the subject, following it unerringly even if he becomes invisible or leaves the region. In every round of the spell’s duration, a miniature bolt of lightning leaps from the thundercloud  219  to strike the subject. Each bolt deals 1 point of electricity damage that is negated by a successful Reﬂex save. Material Component: A small piece of copper wire.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  THUNDERLANCE  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 0 ft. Effect: A spearlike beam Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by D. Martin  A faint gray shimmering forceinthegeneralshapeof astafforspearspringsfrom your hand.  220  THUNDEROUS ROAR  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  the roar. Crystalline creatures take 1d6 points of sonic damage per caster level (maximum 10d6).  TIDAL SURGE  Evocation [Water] Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature or all creatures in a 20-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half Spell Resistance: Yes Anexplosionofwaterrushesoutfrom the point you designate, bowling over your enemies.  When you cast this spell, you create a huge wave of water When you cast this spell, that slams into one or more you create a deadly targets within range. If no lance of force. You can large, natural source of water freely make a thunder(a river, lake, or ocean) exists within the spell’s range, you lance retract or grow to can affect only one target. any length from 1 foot If such a source of water to 20 feet, but it always exists within the range of remains a straight lance of force. This effect gives the spell, the spell creates a you a natural reach of 20 burst centered on a location feet. You can use a thunyou designate. In either case, derlance to make powerful the water deals 1d6 points of melee attacks. damage per caster level (maxiYou can wield a thunmum 15d6) to the target or to derlance in one or two creatures within the burst. hands, dealing a base 3d6 In addition, all affected points of damage (crit creatures are subjected to a 20/×3). Instead of using bull rush attack, forcing them your Strength modiﬁer, to make opposed Strength The thunderhead spell seems a nuisance, but it can be deadly you use the higher of checks against the wave of your Intelligence modiﬁer or Charisma water. The water has a +5 bonus on Calling upon the lost voices of dead modiﬁer as a bonus on attack rolls and creatures, you cause the targeted area to the opposed Strength check, or a +10 damage rolls. bonus if the spell is cast near a source becomeﬁlledwiththeenragedroaringofa of water. You designate the direction If you successfully strike a target thousand dinosaurs. The ground beneath the area shakes with the sound. the wave pushes when you cast the protected by any force effect of 3rd level or lower, such as a shield or mage spell; creatures that lose the opposed armor spell, the thunderlance might The resulting blast of sound from the Strength check are pushed back 5 casting of thunderous roar can be heard feet, plus an additional 5 feet for every dispel the force effect in addition to 5 points by which the wave beats their for miles, but the spell affects only those damaging the target. Make a dispel Strength checks, in the chosen direcin its area. All creatures in the affected check against the level of the caster who created the effect. If you succeed, area take 1d6 points of sonic damage tion. It is possible for a wave arising the effect is dispelled. The thunderlance per two caster levels (maximum 5d6). from a body of water to push characters A successful Fortitude saving throw into the water. remains whether you succeed or fail on this check. halves the damage. Additionally, any The wave puts out torches, campﬁres, Material Component: A small metal creature that takes damage from this exposed lanterns, and other open spear. spell must make a Reﬂex saving throw ﬂames if they are carried by the target or be knocked prone from the force of or located within the area and they  are Large or smaller. If the wave hits a magical ﬁre, those ﬂames are targeted by a dispel magic effect as if you had cast the spell.  TIGER’S TOOTH  This spell functions like magic fang (PH 250), except as noted above.  TORTOISE SHELL  Transmutation Level: Druid 6 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) In the blink of an eye, the creature you touched grows the armor plating of a tortoise across its torso and a tough, leathery skin elsewhere. Tortoise shell grants a +6 enhancement bonus to the subject’s existing natural armor bonus. This enhancement bonus increases by 1 for every three caster levels beyond 11th, to a maximum of +9 at 20th level. The enhancement bonus provided by tortoise shell stacks with the target’s natural armor bonus, but not with other enhancement bonuses to natural armor. A creature without natural armor has an effective natural armor of +0, much as a character wearing only normal clothing has an armor bonus of +0. Tortoise shell slows a creature’s movement as if it were wearing heavy armor. An elf subject to tortoise shell, for example, would have a speed of 20 feet and could run only 60 feet per round. The spell affects only a creature’s speed; tortoise shell doesn’t carry an armor check penalty or an arcane spell failure chance.  Your hand glows with roiling purple light as you reach out to deliver lunacy with your touch. You can cause one living creature to become dazed by making a successful touch attack. If the target creature does not make a successful Will save, its mind is clouded and it takes no actions for 1 round per caster level.  TOWERING OAK  Illusion (Glamer) Level: Ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level You evoke the power of the forests, giving yourself the ability to speak for them. You loom over others like a mighty tree dwarfs lesser plants. You draw on the oak’s strength to improve your ability to intimidate your enemies. You gain a +10 competence bonus on Intimidate checks and a +2 enhancement bonus to Strength.  TRAIN ANIMAL  Enchantment (Charm) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Druid 2, ranger 2 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Animal touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) At last, you near the end of the spell’s complicated procedure. As the ﬁnal act of the ritual, you call out the tricks you wish toteachtheanimalyouaretouching.Your  While this spell is in effect, the affected animal gains a number of additional tricks equal to half your caster level (maximum ﬁve). This spell does not modify an animal’s attitude toward you, nor does it guarantee that an animal will cooperate when instructed to perform the newly learned tricks.  TRANSCRIBE SYMBOL Abjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Magic symbol touched Duration: 10 minutes or until discharged Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  You speak quickly, and your animal companion glows brieﬂy, the glow focusing around its natural weapons.  Enchantment [Mind-Affecting] Level: Madness 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  hand tingles for a moment as the spell takes effect.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Transmutation Level: Druid 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 swift action Duration: 1 round  TOUCH OF MADNESS  Mimicking the marks of the sigil on the slateyouhold,yourenderyourselfimmune to detection by the magic symbol. You place a protective spell upon your hand that allows you to touch an untriggered magic sigil (such as a glyph of warding or a symbol of death) without setting it off. The touched sigil is removed from its location and held as magical potential on your hand, as though it were a touch spell. To pick up a sigil in this manner, you must make a successful caster level check (DC 20 + the target glyph’s spell level). Failure indicates that you have triggered the glyph or symbol. If you successfully transfer the sigil to your hand, you can use a standard action to place it on a surface (not a creature) of the sort on which it can normally be scribed. The transferred sigil works normally thereafter and retains all its original triggering conditions, although its current location might make its triggers difﬁcult or impossible to achieve. You can maintain the magic sigil on your hand as long as you concentrate. If your concentration lapses or the spell duration expires while the sigil is thus stored as potential, it immediately triggers upon you (and only you), even if you normally would not meet its trigger conditions. The effect has the  221  same saving throw and spell resistance as the original spell did. The only safe way to rid yourself of the stored sigil is to place it upon a suitable surface. Focus: A piece of slate that has been scoured bare and smooth on one side.  An affected creature that is attacked gains a new saving throw to break free of the enchantment. Material Component: A drop of pine resin.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  TRANSFIX  222  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 7 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes With a declaration, you ﬁnish your casting. Immediately, beings in the affected area cease moving, standing as still as statues. This spell causes any Medium or smaller humanoids within the area of the spell to become paralyzed. When casting the spell, you must specify a condition that will end it (“Wait here until the dragon arrives”), even if that condition can never feasibly be met (“Stay here until the sun shines at night”). Subjects in the area that fail their saves immediately become aware of the condition, but they cannot communicate it due to their paralyzed state (although someone could use a spell such as detect thoughts to ascertain the condition). For every hour the creatures are transﬁxed before the condition is met, they are allowed another saving throw to break free of the spell’s effect. As long as the spell operates, any Medium or smaller humanoid that enters its area must make a successful saving throw or become transﬁxed with the same exit conditions (they too become aware of the exit conditions on becoming transﬁxed). Likewise, any creatures removed from the area are freed from the spell’s effect.  dimension door spells (PH 221) and exchange appearances, as if using disguise self spells (PH 222) to appear as each other. Your target can negate this spell with a successful saving throw. If you or your target exceed the capacity of the dimension door spell or if you and your target have bodies that are so different that the disguise self spell could not disguise you as your target, this spell fails. Magic that penetrates disguises (such as true seeing) reveals the identities of you and your target. Otherwise, you are considered to be disguised as your target and vice versa for the duration of the spell. You get a +10 bonus on Disguise checks to impersonate the target. When the spell ends, you and your target revert to your true appearances in your current locations. You do not switch places again.  TRANSMUTE ROCK TO LAVA  Transcribe symbol allows a wizard to pick up and move a protective glyph  TRANSLOCATION TRICK  Conjuration [Teleportation] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: You and one creature Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes You utter the words, and in an instant you and your target are switched—you take its positionandform,anditappearswhereyou hadstoodmomentsbefore,lookingtoothers as you appear. You and the other target switch locations, as if simultaneously using  Transmutation [Earth, Fire] Level: Druid 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: One 10-ft. cube Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex half; see text Spell Resistance: No Asyoureleasethespell’senergy,thetargeted areaofstoneinstantlyturnstomoltenlava, and the uncomfortable burning in your chest immediately ceases. You transform natural, uncut, or unworked rock of any sort into an equal volume of red-hot molten lava. All creatures in the spell’s area that make successful Reﬂex saves take 6d6 points of ﬁre damage, provided they can physically escape the area on their next turn. Creatures that fail their saves, or those unable to escape the area, take 20d6 points of ﬁre damage  The touched animal or magical beast gets a 20-foot enhancement bonus to its speed, and it can hustle without taking damage or becoming fatigued as long as the spell is in effect. While bearing  CHAPTER 1  You can detect copper, silver, gold, platinum, and gems within 30 feet, as well as differentiate between the ﬁve kinds of valuables. When you detect one of these types of valuables, the exact location of the source is not revealed—only its presence and direction. Whenever you come within 5 feet of the treasure, you can pinpoint its exact location. The spell can penetrate barriers, but 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, a thin sheet of lead, or 3 feet of wood or dirt blocks it.  Illus. by W. England  With words of encouragement, you make the creature better able to handle the rigors of overland travel, at the expense of its ability to ﬁght.  Divination Level: Bard 3, druid 3, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 hour/level A multihued glow of metallic colors surrounds you. The swirling glow manifests as a thin mist that forces itself up into your nose. Suppressing a sneeze, you note with excitement the unmistakable scent of treasure.  TREMOR  Evocation [Earth] Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 40-ft.-radius spread Duration: 1 round/3 levels Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No  TRAVELER’S MOUNT  Transmutation Level: Blackguard 1, druid 1, paladin 1, ranger 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Animal or magical beast touched Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  TREASURE SCENT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  in each round they remain in the area. Creatures in the lava have their speed reduced to 5 feet and take a –2 penalty on attack rolls and to Armor Class. Even after leaving the area of the spell, creatures that were exposed to the lava take half damage (either 3d6 or 10d6) for 1 additional round. If transmute rock to lava is cast upon the ceiling of a cavern or tunnel, the lava falls to the ﬂoor and spreads out in a 15-foot-radius pool at a depth of approximately 1-1/2 feet. The rain of lava deals 2d6 points of ﬁre damage to anyone caught directly beneath (Reﬂex half). In addition, creatures take 10d6 points of ﬁre damage each round when they are caught in the area of the pool. Although constructions of worked stone can’t be targeted with this spell, casting it on unworked stone below or adjacent to such structures deals 10d6 points of ﬁre damage per round to any part of the structure in contact with the lava. Wooden structures in contact with lava instantly burst into ﬂame. The lava cools naturally from its surface toward its center, and it no longer deals ﬁre damage after 2d6 hours as it slowly reverts to stone. Though a 15-foot-radius pool can take as long as two days to completely cool, the core of a 10-foot cube of lava might remain molten for a month or more. Magical or enchanted stone is not affected by the spell.  The treasure scent spell allows a spellcaster to sniff out riches  a rider, the mount no longer attacks in combat. The steed willingly bears its rider into battle; it just can’t use its own natural weapons for the duration of the spell.  Whenyoucastthisspell,asmall,localized tremor shakes the ground in the area. Detritus and loose debris rattle with the small quake, and creatures caught in the area stumble and fall. This minor quake is not strong enough to damage structures. The effect lasts for 1 round per three caster levels, during which time any spellcaster on the ground in the area must succeed on a Concentration check (DC 15 + spell level) or lose any spell she is casting. A  223  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  creature attempting to use a skill that would provoke attacks of opportunity (such as Disable Device, Heal, Open Lock, and Use Rope, among others) must succeed on a DC 15 Concentration check, or the action automatically fails and is wasted. Each creature in the area must make a Reﬂex save each round or be knocked prone.  TREMORSENSE  Transmutation Level: Ranger 2, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, F/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) You cast this spell and know where each ofyouropponentsstands.Theirpresenceis marked in your mind like ripples radiating along the surface of a pond. You can automatically pinpoint the location of any object or creature within 30 feet that is in contact with the ground. Arcane Focus: A ﬂeck of skin from a creature that has tremorsense.  TRIADSPELL  Transmutation Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous Youcompletethecasting,anddeepwithin your mind, you feel one of your prepared spells subdividing into three parts, each as powerful as its original. You alter one of your prepared spells so that you can cast it three times before it is expended. The prepared spell must be of 3rd level or lower, and once the triadspell is cast, you can cast the altered spell two additional times (a total of three times) before it is expended. The altered spell functions normally and requires components or XP for each use as if you were casting three separate spells. If you later choose to prepare a different spell in that spell slot, any extra castings provided by the triadspell are lost. You cannot cast  224  triadspell more than once upon a single prepared spell.  TRUE CREATION  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Creation 8 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 0 ft. Effect: Unattended, nonmagical object of nonliving matter, up to 1 cu. ft./level Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With one last invocation to your deity, you endthespellandbringintobeingtheobject you desire. You create a nonmagical, unattended object of any sort of matter. Items created are permanent and cannot be negated by dispelling magic or negating powers. For all intents and purposes, these items are completely real. The volume of the item created cannot exceed 1 cubic foot per caster level. You must succeed on an appropriate skill check to make a complex item, such as a Craft (bowmaking) check to make straight arrow shafts or a Craft (gemcutting) check to make a cut and polished gem. Unlike the items brought into being by the lower-level spells minor creation and major creation, objects created by the casting of true creation can be used as material components. Material Component: A small piece of matter of the same type of item you plan to create—a sliver of wood to create arrow shafts, a tiny piece of the appropriate stone to create a polished gem, and so forth. XP Cost: Half the item’s gold piece value in XP, or 50 XP, whichever is more.  TRUE DOMINATION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Domination 8 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One humanoid Duration: 24 hours/level Saving Throw: Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  Reachingoutwithyourthoughts,yougrasp the mind of your foe and take command of its actions. You can control the actions of any humanoid. You establish a telepathic link with the subject’s mind. If a common language is shared, you can generally force the subject to perform as you desire, within the limits of its abilities. If no common language is shared, you can communicate only basic commands, such as “Come here,” “Go there,” “Fight,” and “Stand still.” You know what the subject is experiencing, but you do not receive direct sensory input from it. Subjects have a chance of resisting this control by making a Will save to avoid the effect when the spell is cast. Those affected by the spell and then forced to take actions against their nature receive a new saving throw with a –4 penalty. Obviously self-destructive orders might be carried out, unless the subject can make a saving throw with the –4 penalty. Once control is established, the range at which it can be exercised is unlimited, as long as you and the subject are on the same plane. You need not see the subject to control it. Protection from evil or a similar spell can prevent you from exercising control or using the telepathic link while the subject is so warded, but it does not prevent the establishment of domination or dispel it.  TSUNAMI  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 9 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: 20-ft./level-wide, 10-ft.-long, 40-ft.-high wave of water; see text Duration: Concentration, up to 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude partial (object) Spell Resistance: No Theeldest,mostpowerfulforcesofelemental water heed your summons and obey your request. These forces of pure elemental power gather together a wall of water that moves inexorably in the direction of your choice, crushing all that it encounters.  TUNNEL SWALLOW  You unleash the power of this spell, and the walls of the tunnel begin to roil and shift on allsides,clenchinginrapidsuccessionasthey ﬂing your opponents down the hallway.  UNBINDING  Abjuration Level: Liberation 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: 180 ft. Area: 180-ft.-radius burst centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  Illus. by J. Engle  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: Tunnel section up to 20 ft. in diameter and up to 50 ft. long Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  You cause a section of tunnel to ﬂex with peristaltic convulsions, crushing its contents and moving them along its length in the direction you designate. Each creature and object in the affected tunnel section is crushed for 1d6 points of damage per level (maximum 15d6) and is moved from its former position to a point just outside the affected tunnel section. A creature that makes a successful Reﬂex saving throw takes only half damage and is moved halfway from its former position in the tunnel toward the designated end of the tunnel section. When the spell duration expires, the tunnel returns to its former shape and size, with no harm done to its structure. Tunnel swallow affects both worked and natural tunnels, as well as corridors in surface buildings, but does not harm the structure. Movement caused by this spell does not provoke attacks of -opportunity. Material Component: A lump of chewed vegetable or meat.  CHAPTER 1  Extracting a victim in this manner requires a DC 20 Strength check. A tsunami’s progress can be halted by anything that would normally block line of effect along its path, assuming the tsunami does not destroy the intervening object or creature. If only a portion of the tsunami is blocked, the rest of it continues on. Although this spell can be cast on dry land, it is most effective when cast on the open sea. In this case, saving throws to avoid full damage are made with a –4 penalty, and the width of the tsunami increases to 40 feet per caster level. A tsunami that begins on water but then travels onto land immediately shrinks to its land size and speed. A tsunami does not vanish if it moves beyond the spell’s initial range. Material Component: A crown of coral set with pearls (total value of at least 5,000 gp).  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell creates a towering tsunami and sends it forth in a powerful wave to smash all in its path. The tsunami starts at any point you select within range of the spell and then moves at a speed of 60 feet in any direction chosen by you. Once the direction is set, the tsunami cannot change course. The tsunami deals 1d6 points of bludgeoning damage per caster level (maximum 20d6) to all in its path. Anything struck can make a Fortitude saving throw for half damage. Gargantuan or larger creatures that fail the save are knocked prone. Huge or smaller creatures that fail the save are picked up and carried with the wave. Each round a victim is carried by the tsunami, it takes the bludgeoning damage again and can make an additional Fortitude save for half damage. Creatures being carried by a tsunami cannot move in any other way. They can otherwise act normally, but must make a Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level) to cast a spell. Creatures caught in a tsunami take a –4 penalty to Dexterity and a –2 penalty on attack rolls. They can escape the wave by making successful DC 20 Swim checks, as long as they end their movement outside the effect of the tsunami. Any creature that comes in contact with a tsunami as a result of movement during its turn is considered to have been struck by the tsunami’s movement. A creature can attempt to extract another creature caught by a tsunami, providing the rescuer resists being swept up or knocked down by the tsunami and can reach the victim  A burst of white energy erupts from your body to destroy spells that contain, constrain, or seal.  The tsunami spell can wash the natural world clean of unbalancing force  225  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  An unbinding spell negates charm and hold spells of all types; arcane locks and similar closures; and spells that create physical or magical barriers, such as wall of ﬁre, wall of force, guards and wards, temporal stasis, and slow spells, among others. The effect of a statue spell is also ended, and a magic jar is shattered—forever destroyed—and the life force within snuffed out. In addition, any spell that holds magical effects, including other spells (magic mouth, imbue with spell ability, and so on), immediately releases them at a range of 0 feet. Protective spells such as protection from evil, shield, globe of invulnerability, and similar spells are not affected by an unbinding. Petriﬁed creatures are neither revealed nor restored. Individuals bound to service are not freed (including creatures such as familiars, invisible stalkers, genies, and elementals). An antimagic ﬁeld is not affected, nor does the effect of unbinding penetrate one. A magic circle against evil (or another alignment) that currently holds a creature imprisoned is dispelled. Curses and geas/quest spells are negated only if you are of a level equal to or greater than that of the original caster. All these effects occur without regard to the caster’s wishes. Spell effects on the person of the caster, or effects or items being carried or worn by the caster, remain undisturbed, but any others within the area are affected, including those of allies. The opening of locks or other closures triggers any alarms or traps attached to them. Any released creature might or might not be friendly to the caster. MaterialComponents:Alodestoneand a pinch of saltpeter.  UNDEAD BANE WEAPON  Transmutation Level: Cleric 4, paladin 3 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched or ﬁfty projectiles (all of which must be in contact with each other at the time of casting) Duration: 1 hour/level  226  Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) Your hand glows with a dull light, and whenyoutouchtheweapon,thelightshifts to it, so that it sheds a serene gray radiance as bright as a candle. You give a weapon the undead bane special ability in addition to any other properties it has. Against undead, your weapon’s enhancement bonus is 2 higher than normal, and it deals an extra 2d6 points of damage against undead. The spell has no effect if cast upon a weapon that already has the undead bane special ability. Alternatively, you can affect up to ﬁfty arrows, bolts, or bullets. The projectiles must be of the same kind, and they have to be together, such as in the same quiver. Projectiles, but not thrown weapons, lose their transmutation after one attack. The weapon is treated as goodaligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction.  UNDEAD LIEUTENANT  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One undead creature; see text Duration: 24 hours Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youcastyourspellonthefoulcreature,and for a brief moment your own face appears atop its ruined body. You empower the subject undead with the authority of command over undead in your control. The targeted undead must have Intelligence 5 or higher. Undead under your control obey the target undead as if it were you. You can give orders to the undead normally, superseding the orders of the subject of this spell. The number of undead you can control is increased by an amount equal to your caster level as long as the undead lieutenant is active. If the target undead creature is destroyed, the spell ends.  You can have only one undead lieutenant at any time.  UNDEAD TORCH  Necromancy Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One corporeal undead/ level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You make a dark incantation and smash the ﬁreﬂy between your thumb and foreﬁnger. The undead bursts into blue ﬂames that do not burn. The subject creature deals an extra 2d6 points of damage on melee attacks against living creatures. If an attacked creature has spell resistance, the resistance is checked the ﬁrst time the undead subject attacks it. If your caster level check fails, the creature is unaffected by that casting of the undead torch. If the undead creature is destroyed, the undead torch continues to burn at the location of its destruction until the duration ends, and living creatures that pass through that area take 2d6 points of damage. If the undead creature assumes a nonphysical state (such as a vampire assuming gaseous form), the spell disperses harmlessly. Material Component: A living or dead ﬁreﬂy or glowworm.  UNDEATH’S ETERNAL FOE  Abjuration [Good] Level: Cleric 9 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/5 levels Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You invoke the power of good and indicate each of your party members in turn. A crystalblueauraspringsuparoundeachof them, fortifying them against the assaults of undead.  Transmutation [Earth] Level: Druid 9, sorcerer/wizard 9 Components: V, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 5 rounds  You take up the mantle of the earth, gaining power over it as long as you stand upon or beneath its surface. While energized with the awesome power of this spell, you can choose a spell from those listed below  Transmutation Level: Bard 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level When you cast this spell, a familiar and soothing song wells up in your mind. This spell brings to your mind a song that helps you retain your concentration. The song does not distract you from any task at hand—on the contrary, by humming along to the tune, you can focus your mind with ease. As long as this  UNHOLY STORM  Conjuration (Creation) [Evil, Water] Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3 Components: V, S, M, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Area: Cylinder (20-ft. radius, 20 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Youcallupontheforcesofevil,andaheavy rain begins to fall in the area you indicate, its raindrops foul and steaming. A driving rain falls around you. It falls in a ﬁxed area once created. The storm reduces hearing and visibility, resulting in a –4 penalty on Listen, Spot, and Search checks. It also applies a –4 penalty on ranged attacks made into, out of, or through the storm. Finally, it automatically extinguishes any unprotected ﬂames and has a 50% chance to extinguish protected ﬂames (such as those of lanterns). The rain damages good creatures, dealing 2d6 points of damage per round (good outsiders take double damage). Material Component: A ﬂask of unholy water (25 gp).  Illus. by L. Parillo  You invoke the mighty powers of the earth and it rises about you, limning you from below with brilliant green radiance. The power surges within your hands as you are invested with its might, and you bend that might to your own will.  UNDERSONG  spell is in effect, you can make a Perform check in place of a Concentration check.  CHAPTER 1  UNDERMASTER  once per round and use it as a spelllike ability. Using a spell in this way requires a standard action, even if the spell would normally have a longer casting time (such as move earth). The spells granted by undermaster are earth lock, earthquake, excavate, ﬂesh to stone, meld into stone, move earth, reverse gravity, soften earth and stone, statue,stoneshape,stonetell,stonetoﬂesh, transmute mud to rock, transmute rock to mud, tunnel swallow, wall of stone, and xorn movement. Material Component: A deep blue spinel worth 500 gp.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You grant one or more creatures special abilities that allow them to effectively destroy undead. All subjects receive a death ward effect (PH 217). The subjects also have immunity to the special attacks and abilities of undead that deal ability damage, ability drain, fear effects, disease, paralysis, or poison. Targets can make melee and ranged attacks against ethereal or incorporeal undead as if they were using ghost touch weapons. They also gain a +4 sacred bonus to AC against attacks by undead.  UNLUCK  Divination Level: Bard 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Spewingacurseofbadluck,youﬂingapiece of broken mirror at your target. The mirror shard dissipates harmlessly as soon as it leaves your hand, and the sound of rolling dice is perceptible for an instant. When you cast this spell, you negatively inﬂuence the randomness of fortune for the target. Whenever the affected creature undertakes an action involving random chance (speciﬁcally, whenever any die roll is made for the  The undead torch spell lends an undead greater power to harm the living  227  creature, including attack rolls, damage rolls, and saving throws), two separate rolls are made and the worse result applied. A creature carrying a stone of good luck is immune to the effect of unluck. Material Component: A piece of a broken mirror.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  UNYIELDING ROOTS  Transmutation Level: Druid 8 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Willing creature touched Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  and Will saves as long as the roots remain, but a –4 penalty on Reﬂex saves.  UPDRAFT  Conjuration (Creation) [Air] Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: Instantaneous  Illus. by W. O’Connor  228  Transmutation Level: Courage 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Pointing your holy symbol at your ally as you chant, you imbue him with ﬁghting spirit. The affected creature gains a +4 morale bonus to Strength and Constitution, and a +2 morale bonus on Will saves. In addition, when making a full attack, the affected creature can make one additional attack with any weapon it is holding. The attack is made using the creature’s full base attack bonus, plus any modiﬁers appropriate to the situation. This effect is not cumulative with similar effects, such as that provided by the haste spell.  The creature you touch grows thick tree roots that anchor it to the ground and provide it with lifesustaining healing. The creature you touch must be standing on or otherwise touching the ground for this spell to have an effect on it. For the duration of the spell, the touched creature can’t move from its current space, nor can it be moved from its space by bull rushes, overruns, magic such as Bigby’s forceful hand, or any effect short of a massive earthquake. Such attempts simply fail. If an overrun attempt is made against a creature with unyielding roots, the rooted creature must block rather than avoid the overrun. The rooted creature automatically wins the Strength check to stop the overrun and can make a Strength check (opposed by the overrunning creature’s Strength or Dexterity check) to knock the overrunning creature prone. The roots draw life energy from the ground that feed the touched creature, healing up to 30 points of damage per round, neutralizing poisons automatically, and wiping away negative levels (as the restoration spell). The touched creature gets a +4 bonus on Fortitude  VALIANT FURY  VEIL OF SHADOW  A druid can use the updraft spell to rise high above a battle  Detritus and loose debris on the ground beneathyoubeginstospinabout,caughtin asmallvortex.Thevortexquicklycoalesces intoacolumnofdirtygray-brownairthick enough to hold you aloft. Updraft conjures forth rushing air that propels you upward. You gain 10 feet per level of altitude, and then gently ﬂoat back down to the ground. At any point during your descent, you can move up to 5 feet laterally. Material Component: A miniature propeller or windmill.  Evocation [Darkness] Level: Assassin 2, blackguard 2, cleric 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 minute/level You speak the words of this spell, and tendrils of purple darkness rise from the ground, surrounding you and concealing you from your foes. Swirling wisps of darkness obscure your form, granting you concealment. The 20% miss chance is in effect even if the attacker has darkvision. This spell effect is dispelled in daylight or in the area of a light spell of 3rd level or higher. See invisibility does not counter a veil of shadow’s concealment effect, but a true seeing spell does.  VEIL OF UNDEATH  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 8, sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level  You gain many of the traits common to undead creatures. While the spell lasts, you have immunity to mind-affecting spells and abilities, poison, sleep, paralysis, stunning, disease, death, extra damage from critical hits, nonlethal damage, death from massive damage, ability drain, energy drain, fatigue, exhaustion, damage to physical ability scores, and any effect requiring a Fortitude save unless it is harmless or affects objects. You need not breathe, eat, or sleep. Like an undead creature, you are damaged by cure spells and healed by inﬂict spells. You don’t actually gain the undead type from casting this spell. Material Component: A ﬁnger from a zombie.  VIGOROUS CIRCLE  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 6, druid 6 Du ration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 40 rounds) This spell functions like mass lesser vigor, except as noted here and that it grants fast healing 3.  VIGOR, GREATER  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 5, druid 5 Duration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 35 rounds) This spell functions like lesser vigor, except as noted here and that it grants fast healing 4.  Illus. by L. Parrillo  This spell functions like lesser vigor, except as noted here and that it grants fast healing 2.  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Range: 20 ft. Target: One creature/2 levels, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Du ration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 25 rounds) This spell functions like lesser vigor, except that it affects multiple creatures.  VILE DEATH  VIGOR  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 3, druid 3 Duration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 25 rounds)  VIGOR, MASS LESSER  CHAPTER 1  Conjuration (Healing) Level: Cleric 1, druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: 10 rounds + 1 round/level (max 15 rounds) Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  lost from starvation, thirst, or suffocation, nor does it allow a creature to regrow or attach lost body parts. The effects of multiple vigor spells do not stack; only the highest-level effect applies.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Upon completion of the spell, you exhale your last breath and accept a brief embrace from death.  VIGOR, LESSER  The vile death spell grants an undead creature some of the power of a ﬁend  Thesoundsofbattleringinyourearsasyou lay hands on your fallen comrade. You can spareneithertimenormagictodomoreright now,butthebloodﬂowslowstoatrickleand herbreathingbecomeslesslabored,evenas you are called to the aid of another. The subject gains fast healing 1, enabling it to heal 1 hit point per round until the spell ends and automatically becoming stabilized if it begins dying from hit point loss during that time. Lesser vigor does not restore hit points  Conjuration (Calling) [Evil] Level: Cleric 9, sorcerer/ wizard 9 Components: V, S, M, XP Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Target: One corporeal undead creature Duration: Permanent (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes The ground tears at your feet, and you can hear the distant screams of people in pain. Anunwholesomeredlightemanatesfrom the tear and coalesces into the translucent form of a ﬁend. It sneers at you as the earth closes, then it turns to look at the undead hostyouchoseasthespell’ssubject.Boththe undead and the ﬁend shudder as they meld together and the red glow dissipates.  229  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  You summon the spirit of a ﬁend from the depths of the Nine Hells or the Abyss and bind it into the body of a corporeal undead creature—either a bodak, devourer, ghast, ghoul, mohrg, mummy, nightshade, skeleton, vampire, vampire spawn, wight, or zombie. Binding the ﬁend applies the ﬁendish template (MM 108) to the undead creature. The resulting creature is independent of you, and can act on its own. Its initial attitude toward you is indifferent. Material Component: A bit of brimstone and a bloodstone worth at least 500 gp. XP Cost: 100 XP.  VINE MINE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius/level spread Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes Youholdthecrownofivyleavesaloft,invoking the powers of nature, and an explosion of plant growth ﬁlls the area—plants over which you have control. You create and direct the rapid growth of vines. When you cast the spell, choose one of the following effects. • Climbing aid (treat as knotted ropes) • Bind helpless targets (Escape Artist DC 25 to escape) • Hamper movement (as heavy undergrowth) • Camouﬂage (add +4 competence bonus on Hide checks) As a standard action, you can redirect the vines’ growth (thus changing the effect). Material Component: A crown of ivy leaves.  VINE STRIKE  Divination Level: Druid 1, ranger 1 Components: V, DF  230  Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round As you intone the sounds of the spell, your sight temporarily dims under a green gloom. An eyeblink later, the dimness disappears, and you feel a new connection withthenaturalorder,asifitweredirecting where to land your blow. While this spell is in effect, you have a special connection to the forces of nature that allows you to deliver sneak attacks on plant creatures as if they were not immune to sneak attacks. To attack a plant creature in this manner, you must still meet the other requirements for making a sneak attack. This spell applies only to sneak attack damage. It gives you no ability to affect plant creatures with critical hits, nor does it confer any special ability to overcome the damage reduction or other defenses of plant creatures.  VIPERGOUT  Conjuration (Summoning) [see text] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: 1d4+3 summoned creatures Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Achurninginyourstomachovertakesyou asyoucompletethespell.Somethingslithers up your throat, and you vomit serpents. This spell summons 1d4+1 celestial or ﬁendish Medium vipers (MM 280), which leap forth from your mouth to attack your enemies. A celestial viper summoned by this spell has resistance to acid 5, cold 5, and electricity 5; spell resistance 7; and a smite evil attack that provides a +2 bonus on one damage roll. A ﬁendish viper summoned by this spell has resistance to acid 5 and ﬁre 5; spell resistance 7; and a smite good attack that provides a +2 bonus on one damage roll. Starting in the round you complete the spell, you can spit three vipers as a  standard action or one viper as a move action. (Thus, if you move and then cast this spell, you cannot spit any vipers until your next turn, but if you cast this spell without moving, you can spit forth one viper as your move action in that round.) Spat vipers land at your feet in an adjacent square of your choice and act on the same round, on your turn, just as creatures summoned by a summon monster spell do. The snakes are not actually present in your mouth, and they do not interfere with your breathing. However, until you have brought forth all the snakes summoned by the spell, you cannot speak, cast spells with verbal components, or activate items that require speech. When the spell’s duration expires, all the vipers disappear, and any not yet brought forth are lost. When you use a summoning spell to summon a good creature or an evil creature, it is a spell of that type. Material Component: A snakeskin.  VISAGE OF THE DEITY Transmutation [Evil or Good] Level: Cleric 6, Mysticism 6  This spell functions like lesser visage of the deity, except that you take on many qualities of a celestial or ﬁendish creature, as follows. • You take on a shining, metallic appearance (for good clerics) or a more fearsome appearance (for evil clerics). • You gain the ability to smite evil (for good clerics) or good (for evil clerics) once a day. Add your Charisma modiﬁer to your attack roll and your character level to your damage roll against a foe of the appropriate alignment. • You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. • You gain resistance to acid 20, cold 20, and electricity 20 (for good clerics) or resistance to cold 20 and ﬁre 20 (for evil clerics). • You gain damage reduction 10/ magic. • You gain spell resistance 20. Your creature type does not change (you do not become an outsider).  VISAGE OF THE DEITY, GREATER Transmutation [Evil or Good] Level: Cleric 9, Competition 9, Mysticism 9, Puriﬁcation 9  Evil clerics undergo the following transformations. • You grow batlike wings that allow you to ﬂy at your normal speed (average maneuverability). • You gain +1 natural armor. • You gain bite and claw attacks. If you are size Medium or larger, your bite deals 1d6 points of damage and each claw attack deals 1d4 points of damage. If you are Small, your bite deals 1d4 points of damage and each claw attack deals 1d3 points of damage. • You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. • You gain immunity to poison. • You gain resistance to acid 10, cold 10, electricity 10, and ﬁre 10. • You gain damage reduction 10/ magic. • You gain spell resistance 25. • You gain the following bonuses to your ability scores: +4 Str, +4 Dex, +2 Con, +4 Int, +2 Cha.  As you end your prayer, you can feel the hand of your deity upon you. Your appearance reﬂects her divine power, and her touch grants you resistance from some of the damage of this world. You gain a +4 enhancement bonus to Charisma. You also gain resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10 if you are good, or resistance to cold 10 and ﬁre 10 if you are evil.  VISCID GLOB  Conjuration Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes You speak the words of this spell and toss the small ball of silk in the air. It turns into a5-foot-wideglobofdripping,green-gray goo, and the sticky mass rockets toward your target. When you attack with a viscid glob, you make a ranged touch attack against the target. If you miss, the glob might strike a nearby square or creature (see Missing with a Thrown Weapon, PH 158). Once you have established the direction of the miss, roll 1d4 to determine the number of squares away from the target square that the glob lands. A Medium or smaller creature struck by the glob must make a successful Reﬂex save or be instantly stuck in place. A stuck creature can speak but is otherwise limited to purely mental actions (such as casting spells with no somatic or material components) and attempts to free itself by means of a Strength check  CHAPTER 1  • You grow feathered wings that allow you to ﬂy at twice your normal speed (good maneuverability). • You gain +1 natural armor. • You gain low-light vision. • You gain resistance to acid 10, cold 10, and electricity 10. • You gain immunity to disease. • You gain a +4 racial bonus on saving throws against poison. • You gain damage reduction 10/ magic. • You gain spell resistance 25. • You gain the following bonuses to your ability scores: +4 Str, +2 Dex, +4 Con, +2 Int, +4 Wis, +4 Cha.  Transmutation [Evil or Good] Level: Blackguard 4, cleric 3, Mysticism 3, paladin 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level  or Escape Artist check (against a DC equal to this spell’s DC) made as a full-round action. A Large or larger creature stuck in the goo can’t move from the spot where it is glued, but it can otherwise act normally. The glob dissipates when the spell duration expires. Until then, it remains sticky, and any creature touching it (for example, a creature attempting to pull out an ally) must make a successful Reﬂex save or become stuck itself. A creature stuck by such secondary contact is not trapped as thoroughly as a creature targeted by the glob, however, so the DC of the Strength check or Escape Artist check required to get free is reduced by 5. Material Component: A tiny ball of spider silk.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell functions like lesser visage of the deity, except that you take on many qualities of a half-celestial or half-ﬁendish creature. Your creature type changes to outsider for the duration of the spell. Unlike other outsiders, you can be brought back from the dead if you are killed in this form. Good clerics undergo the following transformations.  VISAGE OF THE DEITY, LESSER  VISION OF GLORY  Divination Level: Cleric 1, paladin 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute or until discharged Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes You touch your ally, and her eyes mist over momentarily. You know she is seeing an image of her deity, imploring her to battle in his name. You give the subject creature a brief vision of a divine entity that is giving it support and inspiring it to continue. The creature gets a morale bonus equal to your Charisma modiﬁer on a single saving throw. It must choose to use the bonus before making the roll to which it applies. Using the bonus discharges the spell.  VITRIOLIC SPHERE  Conjuration (Creation) [Acid] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Area: 10-ft.-radius burst Duration: Instantaneous; see text Saving Throw: Reﬂex partial; see text Spell Resistance: No  231  Illus. by W. Reynolds  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Although a safe zone exists at the center of a vortex of teeth, some creatures are too large to take advantage of it  Atthesuccessfulcastingofthespell, you conjure a sizzling emerald sphere. Thesphereimmediatelyshatters,drenching all in the area with a potent acid. Affected creatures take 6d6 points of acid damage. Creatures that succeed on their Reﬂex saving throws take half of this damage. Creatures that fail their Reﬂex saves take full damage, and also take 6d6 points of acid damage in each of the following 2 rounds. Material Component: A tiny glass vial ﬁlled with aqua regia.  VOICE OF THE DRAGON Transmutation Level: Bard 4, Dragon 4, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D)  As you speak the words of the spell and inscribe the motions in the air, your voice deepens,takingonaresonancethatmakes the listener think of authority, power, and great age. You gain a +10 enhancement bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate  232  checks. You also gain the ability to speak and understand (but not read) Draconic. At any time before the spell’s duration expires, you can use a standard action to target a creature with a suggestion effect, which functions identically to the spell of that name (PH 285), including range, duration, and other effects. Doing this causes the voice of the dragon spell to end, though the suggestion itself lasts for the normal duration thereafter. Special: Sorcerers cast this spell at +1 caster level.  VORTEX OF TEETH  Evocation [Force] Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Area: Hollow cylinder (40-ft. radius, 20 ft. high, with a 5-ft.-radius safe zone at the center) Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes  A huge school of transparent piranhas swims rapidly through the air in the area you indicate. These magic ﬁsh are made of forceandtearintothebodiesofcreaturesas though ravenous. Creatures in the area take 3d8 points of damage per round at the beginning of your turn. Because this spell is a force effect, it harms incorporeal creatures. Material Component: A ﬁsh tooth.  VULNERABILITY  Transmutation Level: Assassin 4, cleric 5, sorcerer/ wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes You invoke the power of this spell and a purple mist swirls around your opponent, weakening its mystic protections. This spell lowers the subject’s damage reduction by 5 (to a minimum of 5). For instance, if you successfully cast vulnerability on a dragon with damage  reduction 10/magic, its damage reduction becomes 5/magic. For every four caster levels beyond 9th, the subject’s damage reduction lowers by an additional 5: a reduction of 10 at caster level 15th and a reduction of 15 at caster level 19th.  WAIL OF DOOM  WALL OF EVIL  Abjuration [Evil] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4  You unleash a terrible cry of malice and anger. The very air darkens with black energy as your cry echoes away from you.  You invoke the abjuration and a wall of red and black energy springs up, only to fade away to invisibility.  Anyone caught in the area of this spell suffers excruciating pain and becomes demoralized. Each creature takes 1d4 points of damage per caster level (maximum 15d4) and becomes panicked for 1 round per caster level. A successful Will save halves the damage, reduces the panicked effect to shaken, and reduces the duration of the shaken effect to 1 round.  This spell functions like wall of good (see below), except that good creatures are blocked.  WALL OF CHAOS  Abjuration [Chaotic] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 You invoke the abjuration, and a wall of multicoloredenergyspringsup,becoming translucent and vanishing in a ﬂash. This spell functions like wall of good (see below), except that lawful creatures are blocked.  WALL OF DISPEL MAGIC Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  WALL OF GEARS  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Mechanus 6, sorcerer/wizard 6 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall of moving gears whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level; see text Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: No You pop the gear into your mouth and make a humming, buzzing incantation. The sound takes on a life of its own, and springing from the ground is a huge wall madeofmachinery,allspinning,clattering and moving about, endangering all who are close to it. This spell creates a 6-inch-thick wall of moving iron cogs, wheels, gears, pistons, and assorted mechanical parts. Each 5-foot square of the wall’s surface has hardness 10 and 90 hit points. Both sides of the wall have hundreds of moving parts that ﬂail out, dealing 1d6 points of damage per two caster levels (maximum 15d6) to all creatures  WALL OF GLOOM  Illusion (Shadow) [Darkness, Fear, Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  This spell creates a transparent, permeable barrier. Anyone passing through it becomes the target of a dispel magic effect (PH 223) at your caster level. A summoned creature targeted in this way can be dispelled by the effect. A wall of dispel magic cannot be seen or felt by ordinary means, or even with a see invisibility spell. Detect magic indicates the presence of the effect, and true seeing reveals its presence.  within 10 feet. A successful Reﬂex save halves this damage. Material Component: A small gear.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Necromancy [Fear, Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 5 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: Instantaneous + 1 round/ level or 1 round; see text Saving Throw: Will partial; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  You cast the spell and a translucent wall springs up, a shimmering ﬁeld of faded colorsthatswirlsandmergeswithitselflike the surface of a soap bubble.  Rubbing the ﬂeece between your ﬁngers, you hold up your hand and shout an arcane word. In an instant, a wall of dark shadow appears in the indicated location. Dark whispers,barelyperceptible,constantlyissue forth from the far side of the wall, causing a cold chill to run up your spine. You create a barrier of ominous shadow that obscures vision and blocks line of sight, including darkvision. The wall is insubstantial, so creatures can move through it without penalty. Wall of gloom counters or dispels any light spell of equal or lower level. Material Component: A bit of ﬂeece from a black sheep.  WALL OF GOOD  Abjuration [Good] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 5 ft./2 levels Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes Youinvoketheabjuration,andacascadeof brilliant white energy springs up in a wall that becomes invisible almost instantly. You create an immobile barrier that inhibits evil creatures. An evil summoned creature cannot pass through the wall in either direction, and any other evil creature must suc-  233  This spell functions like wall of good (see above), except that chaotic creatures are blocked.  WALL OF LIGHT  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Evocation [Light] Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level or a sphere or hemisphere with a radius of up to 5 ft./2 levels Duration: 1 minute/level (D) Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes; see text  Illus. by D. Martin  Ablindingﬂashaccompaniesthecompletion of this spell as a wall of pure light springs into being.  A wall of gears strikes those who try to break though it  ceed on a Will save each time it attempts to move through the wall. If the saving throw is failed, the creature’s movement is stopped, and it can take no other action that round. A wall of good must be continuous and unbroken when formed. If it is cast so that an object or creature breaks its surface, the spell fails. ArcaneMaterialComponent:Powdered silver worth 25 gp.  WALL OF GREATER DISPEL MAGIC  Abjuration Level: Cleric 8, sorcerer/wizard 8  234  You cast the spell and a translucent wall springs up, its shimmering ﬁeld pulsing with strong, malignant shades than spin and twist into each other. This spell functions like wall of dispel magic (see above), except that the effect is that of greater dispel magic (PH 223).  WALL OF LAW  Abjuration [Lawful] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 You invoke the abjuration, and a wall of translucentsilverenergyspringsupbefore fading away to nothingness.  This spell causes a wall of dazzling yellow-white light to come into being at any point within range. The wall is opaque to all other creatures, though you can see through it without difﬁculty. A wall of light has no physical substance and does not otherwise hinder attacks, movement, or spells passing through it, although it blocks line of sight for other creatures. A creature that passes through a wall of light becomes dazzled for the duration of the spell. Spell resistance applies when passing through the wall. Sightless creatures and those already dazzled are not affected by passing through a wall of light. A wall of light sheds light equivalent to a daylight spell. Wall of light counters or dispels any darkness spell of equal or lower level. Material Component: A pinch of powdered sunstone.  WALL OF LIMBS  Evocation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 round Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A wall of whirling limbs up to 20 ft. long/level, or a ring of whirling limbs with a radius of up to 5 ft./2 levels, either form 20 ft. high Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes  WALL OF SAND  Conjuration (Creation) [Earth] Level: Cleric 4, druid 5, sorcerer/ wizard 4 Components: V, S, M/DF Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level (S) Duration: Concentration + 1 round/ level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With a rush of hot air, a swirling wall of blowing sand leaps into being. This spell conjures up a 10-foot-thick, viscous, opaque wall of swirling sand.  WALL OF SMOKE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level (S) Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial; see text Spell Resistance: No You wave your hand in a circular motion, and black smoke swirls into existence as a dark wall. This spell creates a thin wall of black smoke. The wall is stationary once created. The wall blocks sight to a limited degree. Creatures on opposite sides of the wall that cannot see over it gain concealment from each other. A creature can pass through a wall of smoke, but it must make a Fortitude save to avoid being nauseated for 1 round.  WALL OF WATER  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: A straight wall whose area is up to one 10-ft. square/level (S) Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates; see text Spell Resistance: No  CHAPTER 1  An immobile, vertical curtain of whirling limbs springs into existence. The limbs resemble your own forelimbs. A creature attempting to move through the wall takes 5d6 points of damage and must succeed on a DC 18 Strength check or become stuck within the wall and unable to move (a charging creature gains a +2 bonus on the Strength check). The creature takes 5d6 points of damage each round at the beginning of your turn until freed. A creature can free itself with a DC 18 Strength check, or by dealing 30 points of damage to a 5-foot section of wall. A creature that starts its turn next to a wall of limbs must succeed on a DC 18 Strength check or be grabbed by the ﬂailing arms and become stuck, as above. If you evoke the wall so that it appears where creatures are, each creature takes damage as if passing through the wall. Each such creature can avoid the wall (ending up on the side of its choice) and thus take no damage by making a successful Reﬂex save. A wall of limbs provides cover against attacks made through it.  A moderate wind (11+ mph), such as from a gust of wind spell, destroys the wall in 1 round. This spell does not function underwater.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  By ﬂexing your arm and speaking the repetitive words of power, you unleash the spell.Inthedistance,thegroundiscovered in a writhing mass. As you watch, over the courseofafewseconds,thewrithingmass rises up and forms a wall of thousands of wriggling arms resembling your own.  The spell must be cast so that it rests on a solid surface. Once cast, the wall is immobile. The sand is sufﬁciently thick to block ranged attacks, providing normal cover appropriate for its size, but creatures can attempt to force their way through it. Moving through a wall of sand is difﬁcult, requiring a full-round action and a Strength check. A creature moves 5 feet through a wall of sand for every 5 points by which its Strength check result exceeds 10. Creatures within a wall of sand are considered blinded and deafened, and they are unable to speak or breathe. Thus, they might begin to suffocate (DMG 304) if they remain within the wall too long. Spells with verbal components cannot be cast within the wall, and any other spell requires a successful Concentration check (DC 20 + spell level). Creatures with reach can attempt to attack through the wall, but targets have total concealment and total cover, and the attacker must have a general idea where the target is located. Any open, unprotected ﬂame thrust into a wall of sand is instantly extinguished. Arcane Material Component: A handful of sand.  Awallspringsupintheareayoudesignate. Composed of a sheet of water rising vertically,thetransparentwalldoesnotprevent youfromseeingbeyondit.Thewaterofthe wall is calm as a lake on a windless day. This spell creates a 10-foot-thick wall of fresh water or seawater (as selected by you). The water forms around objects and creatures in its area, plunging these creatures and objects underwater. A creature in the area where the water is created can make a Reﬂex save to move to a random side of the wall before it forms completely. This movement must occur on the creature’s next turn, or it immediately suffers the full effect of being in the wall. Creatures can move through a wall of water by making Swim checks, or can walk along the ﬂoor at half speed; the water itself is considered to be calm water. Any open ﬂames in the area when the water forms are immediately extinguished. Creatures with the ﬁre subtype take 2d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level each round they remain partially or wholly in the wall. Although the wall is transparent, it provides cover to any targets inside against attacks launched from outside the wall. It cannot be destroyed by physical damage, nor can it be drained off to a different location. Water brought out of the wall in a container instantly evaporates as the wall itself forms more water to replace what was removed. Material Component: A sponge.  235  WAR CRY  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting, Sonic] Level: Bard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round You jab your weapon into the air as if in triumph, letting out a cry of victory before you have even made your attack. Foes aroundyouseemsurprisedbyyourdisplay even as the feeling grows within you that you cannot fail.  Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: No Water whirls into the air, swirling upward with a thunderous noise like a tornado of ﬂuid. Waterspout causes water to rise up into a whirling, cylindrical column. You can direct the movement of the waterspout as a move action.  Illus. by C. Frank  You gain a +4 morale bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls made as part of a charge. If you deal damage with a charge attack, your foe must succeed on a Will save or become panicked for 1 round (spell resistance applies to this effect).  WARNING SHOUT  Transmutation [Sonic] Level: Paladin 1 Components: V Casting Time: 1 immediate action Range: 30 ft. Targets: All allies within 30 feet Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No You shout a few words imbued with power by your faith, and your next words ring out clearandfardespiteothernoiseorintervening barriers. All allies within range are no longer considered ﬂat-footed, even if they have not yet acted in the current combat. Anyone sleeping naturally (as opposed to magically induced sleep, such as from a sleep spell) within the area is woken by a warning shout.  WATERSPOUT  236  Conjuration (Creation) [Water] Level: Druid 7, Ocean 7 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 round Range: Long (400 ft. + 40 ft./level) Effect: Cylinder (5-ft. radius, 80 ft. high) Duration: 1 round/level  damage. Medium or smaller creatures that fail their saves are sucked into the spout and held suspended in its powerful currents, taking 2d6 points of damage each round (no save). Trapped creatures remain inside for 1d3 rounds before the waterspout ejects them out the top of the spout, and they fall back to the surface (taking 8d6 points of falling damage) 1d8×5 feet from the base of the waterspout. Waterborne creatures or objects within 10 feet of the spout (below and on all sides) also must make successful Reﬂex saves or be sucked into the spout if they are Medium or smaller. Anything sucked into the spout takes 3d8 points of damage and is then trapped for 1d3 rounds as described above. Only the smallest of watercraft, such as canoes, kayaks, or coracles, can be sucked into the spout. The occupant of any such craft can make a Profession (sailor) check instead of a Reﬂex save if it so chooses to avoid being sucked up.  WAVE OF GRIEF  With a war cry spell, a roar of triumph brings victory closer  A waterspout moves at a speed of 30 feet. You can concentrate on controlling the waterspout’s every movement or specify a simple program, such as move straight ahead, zigzag, circle, or the like. Directing a waterspout’s movement or changing its programmed movement is a move action for you. A waterspout always moves during your turn in the initiative order. If the waterspout exceeds the spell’s range, it collapses and the spell ends. A waterspout batters creatures and objects it touches, and it often sucks them up. Any creature or object that comes in contact with it must succeed on a Reﬂex save or take 3d8 points of  Enchantment [Evil, Mind-Affecting] Level: Bard 2, blackguard 2, cleric 2 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Cone-shaped burst Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes Emitting a mournful wail, you send out a pulse of magic imbued with sorrow and sadness. All within the cone when the spell is cast take a –3 penalty on attack rolls, saving throws, ability checks, and skill checks. Material Component: Three tears.  WEAPON OF ENERGY  Transmutation [see text] Level: Cleric 3, sorcerer/wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One weapon  Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (object, harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) Yourhandglowsslightly.Withatouch,you transfer the glow from your hand onto the intended weapon.  Transmutation Level: Bard 3, cleric 3, sorcerer/ wizard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One bludgeoning weapon or ﬁfty bludgeoning projectiles, all of which must be in contact with one another at the time of casting Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object) You pass your hands over the weapon, and its head glows with a blue-gold radiance.  Transmutation Level: Blackguard 3, cleric 3, paladin 3 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Weapon touched Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless, object) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless, object)  Wielding the weapon your deity favors, you call upon that divine force to imbue it with power. You must be holding your deity’s favored weapon to cast this spell. You can use the weapon as if you had proﬁciency with it even if you normally do not. The weapon gains a +1 enhancement bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls and an additional special ability (see the list below). A double weapon gains this enhancement bonus and special ability for only one of its two ends, as chosen by you. When you reach caster level 9th, the enhancement bonus of the weapon increases to +2. At 12th level, the bonus rises to +3, at 15th level it is +4, and at 18th level it becomes +5. The list below includes deities from the core pantheon as well as other deities described in D&D supplements, along with the ﬁve alignment components. If a cleric worshiping a different deity casts this spell, the DM should assign an appropriate weapon special ability of the same power level as those given here. Deities Bahamut: +1 frost heavy pick Boccob: +1 spell storing quarterstaff Corellon Larethian: +1 keen longsword  CHAPTER 1  WEAPON OF IMPACT  WEAPON OF THE DEITY  Ehlonna: +1 frost longsword Erythnul: +1 mighty cleaving morningstar Fharlanghn: +1 defending quarterstaff Garl Glittergold: +1 throwing battleaxe Gruumsh: +1 returning shortspear Heironeous: +1 shock longsword Hextor: +1 mighty cleaving heavy flail Kord: +1 mighty cleaving greatsword Kurtulmak: +1 shock shortspear Lolth: +1 keen whip Moradin: +1 throwing warhammer Nerull: +1 keen scythe Obad-Hai: +1 defending quarterstaff Olidammara: +1 keen rapier Pelor: +1 flaming heavy mace St. Cuthbert: +1 mighty cleaving heavy mace Vecna: +1 frost dagger Wee Jas: dagger of venom Tiamat: +1 flaming heavy pick Yondalla: +1 defending short sword  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  You cause a weapon to gain the ability to deal energy damage in addition to its other abilities, similar to how a ﬂaming burst weapon deals extra ﬁre damage on a hit or a critical hit. The weapon can deal acid, cold, electricity, or ﬁre damage, chosen by you at the time of casting. The weapon deals an extra 1d6 points of damage of that energy type on a successful hit. On a critical hit, the weapon deals an additional 1d10 points of energy damage. If the weapon’s critical multiplier is ×3, add 2d10 points of energy damage instead, and if the multiplier is ×4, add 3d10 points of energy damage. This spell can be cast on a weapon that already deals energy damage, and if the weapon already creates the same type of damage as the spell, the effects stack. For example, if cast on a +1 ﬂaming longsword to give it additional ﬁre damage, the weapon now deals an extra 2d6 points of ﬁre damage per hit. This spell has a descriptor that is the same as the energy created by the target weapon. For example, weapon of energy is a ﬁre spell when used to give a weapon bonus ﬁre damage.  This spell makes a bludgeoning weapon have greater impact, improving its ability to deal telling blows. This transmutation doubles the threat range of the weapon. If the spell is cast on sling bullets or other bludgeoning projectiles, the weapon of impact effect on a particular projectile ends after one use, whether or not the missile strikes its intended target. Multiple effects that increase a weapon’s threat range, such as the Improved Critical feat, don’t stack.  Alignments Good: +1 frost warhammer Evil: +1 mighty cleaving light flail Neutral: +1 defending heavy mace Law: +1 flaming longsword Chaos: +1 shock battleaxe  WEAPON SHIFT  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One melee weapon of up to 15 lb. Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (object) Spell Resistance: Yes (object) Wavingthefoldedsheetofparchmentbefore you,youﬁrmlygraspthetargetweapon.A barelyperceptiblerust-brownglowengulfs it, then grows into a shining radiance of molten-metalred.Astheradiancesubsides, you note with satisfaction that the weapon now has the desired shape. A weapon shift spell allows you to temporarily transform any one melee weapon into a different melee weapon. Thus, a greatclub could be transformed into a greatsword, a light pick into a morning star, or a dagger into a battleaxe. Improvised weapons and double weapons cannot be targeted or be the result of this spell. Magic weapons transformed retain all their special abilities as long as the new form could legally have those abilities, and weapons  237  made from special materials retain their special materials. Material Component: A piece of parchment folded into the shape of the weapon type desired.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  WEATHER EYE  Divination Level: Druid 3 Components: V, S, M, F Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 1 mile + 1 mile/level Area: 1-mile radius + 1-mile/level centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No  You speak the words of power, and a warm orange ﬁre radiates from you, aiding those that believe in the true balance, and harming all others.  Illus. by J. Engle  Using your connection to the divine forces and nature, you gaze into your scrying deviceandsummonimagestomindofwhat the future holds for the weather. You can accurately predict the natural weather up to one week into the future. If unnatural forces currently affect the weather, then weather eye reveals the spells or abilities in effect, though not the source of those abilities. Material Component: Incense. Focus: A scrying device of some kind (bowl, mirror, crystal ball, and so forth).  WEIGHED IN THE BALANCE Necromancy Level: Balance 9 Components: V  238  Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Area: Creatures in a 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Will negates Spell Resistance: Yes  This spell harms or heals creatures within its area based on their alignments and life status. The effect does the most harm to those creatures most extreme in alignment and most out of balance with the natural world. For living creatures that have an alignment with no neutral component (LG, CG, LE, or CE), this spell acts as an inﬂict critical wounds spell (PH 244). For living creatures that have an alignment with a neutral component and one other (NG, LN, CN, or NE), this spell acts as an inﬂict moderate wounds spell (PH 244). For living creatures that have a neutral alignment (N) and all undead creatures, this spell acts as a heal spell (PH 239), dealing damage to undead but acting as a beneﬁcial spell to neutral creatures.  WHIRLING BLADE  Transmutation Level: Bard 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action  A whirling blade makes attacks against many foes  Range: 60 ft. Effect: 60-ft. line Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No With weapon in hand, you ﬁnish the last of thearcanegesturesandwordsthatactivate the power of the spell. As you cast the spell, you hurl a single slashing weapon at your foes.Theblade,carriedalongbothbyyour mightandyourmagicalprowess,slashesat your foes while whirling forward. You hurl a weapon held at the time of casting, and it magically attacks all enemies along a line to the extent of the spell’s range. You make a normal melee attack, just as if you were attacking with the weapon in melee, against each foe in the weapon’s path, but you can choose to substitute your Intelligence modiﬁer or your Charisma modiﬁer (as appropriate for your spellcasting class) for your Strength modiﬁer on the weapon’s attack rolls and damage rolls. Even if your base attack bonus would normally give you multiple attacks, a whirling blade gets only one attack (at your best attack bonus) against each target. The weapon deals damage just as if you had swung it in melee, including any bonuses you might have from ability scores or feats. No matter how many targets your weapon hits or misses, it instantly and unerringly returns to your hand after attempting the last of its attacks. Focus: A slashing melee weapon that you hurl.  WHIRLWIND, GREATER  This spell is a more potent version of whirlwind (PH 301). A greater whirlwind affects creatures differently, depending on their size and where they are in relation to the twister. Near the Tornado: Large or smaller creatures who start their turn within 60 feet of the center of a greater whirlwind must succeed on a Fortitude save or be dragged 1d4×10 feet toward the center of the twister, taking 1d4 points of nonlethal damage per 10 feet dragged. Huge creatures within 40 feet of the twister must succeed on a Fortitude save or be knocked prone. Gargantuan and Colossal creatures within 40 feet of the twister must succeed on a Fortitude save before moving away from the twister. Flying creatures of Huge size or smaller that fail their Fortitude saves are sucked to the center of the twister, taking 2d6 points of damage from the battering and buffeting. Gargantuan ﬂying creatures must succeed on a Fortitude save or be pulled 1d6×10 feet toward the center of the twister. Colossal ﬂyers must likewise make Fortitude saves or be pulled 1d6×5 feet toward the twister’s center. Any Huge or smaller creature that comes in contact with the spell effect must succeed on a Reﬂex save or take 3d6 points of damage. A Large or smaller creature that fails its ﬁrst save must succeed on a second one or be picked up bodily by the cyclone and held suspended in its powerful winds. Any creature picked up is ejected 3 rounds later. Inside the Tornado: Creatures that start their turn inside the tornado take  WILD RUNNER  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, ranger 4 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 10 minutes/level (D) A vibrant green glow surrounds you, and you feel your body begin to change shape. You grow several inches in height and become aware of a bending and lengthening of your spine. Glancing back, you see a second pair of hoofed legs and a swishing tail. When you cast this spell, you assume the physical appearance and many of the qualities and abilities of a centaur (MM 32). While under the effect of the spell, your creature type changes to monstrous humanoid, and your size changes to Large. You have the space and reach of a centaur (10 feet/5 feet). You gain the Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution of an average centaur (Str 18, Dex 14, Con 15), but you retain your own mental ability scores. Your  WIND AT BACK  Evocation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Targets: One creature/level, no two of which are more than 30 ft. apart Duration: 12 hours Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  CHAPTER 1  Wind whips into a frenzy and becomes a tornado that wreaks destruction as you direct, ﬂinging your foes into the air and destroying nearby structures.  base land speed becomes 50 feet. You gain darkvision out to 60 feet. You can still use any extraordinary, spell-like, and supernatural abilities possessed by your normal form. You gain all the advantages of a quadruped form (greater carrying capacity, +4 bonus to resist trip attacks, and so on); this includes the ability to ﬁght effectively while carrying a rider. You can still use your equipment and cast spells normally.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  Evocation [Air] Level: Druid 9, Windstorm 9 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Effect: 20-ft.-radius tornado, up to 5 ft./level high, centered on a point in space Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude partial Spell Resistance: Yes  6d6 points of damage for each round they remain inside at the beginning of your turn. Creatures inside the tornado can’t do much; attacks, spellcasting, and movement are impossible within a greater whirlwind. When the greater whirlwind ejects a creature, it reappears 4d6×5 feet away from the twister’s center in a random direction, and 4d6×5 feet off the ground (immediately falling if it can’t ﬂy). Terrain and Structures: The tornado uproots trees and other vegetation automatically, and it leaves a trail of dense rubble (DMG 90) wherever it goes. Structures within a greater whirlwind take 2d6×10 points of damage per round. In a round or two, that amount of damage is sufﬁcient to destroy any building made of materials less sturdy than reinforced masonry. No ranged attacks can pass through the twister. A greater whirlwind extinguishes all ﬂames it touches. Listen checks are impossible within a greater whirlwind. A greater whirlwind remains stationary unless you direct it elsewhere as a move action. It moves up to 60 feet per round.  Youintonethewordsthatwillgiveyouand your allies speed and stamina for the long journeyahead.Yourcompanionsarebathed in a soft green radiance as the spell is cast. This spell doubles the overland speed (PH 164) of all subjects, assuming they are all traveling together in the same direction, including pack animals and mounts. This spell does not affect nonliving material. The spell does not affect tactical speed.  WIND TUNNEL  Evocation Level: Druid 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Targets: One creature/level Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You evoke the powers of the sky, and the wind picks up around you. It blows from your back, now, and wraps itself around your allies’ missiles, sending them to their targets more surely. You call on the wind to assist your allies’ accuracy. A wind tunnel improves  239  the accuracy of your allies’ ranged weapons, granting each subject a +5 competence bonus on ranged attacks. Further, it doubles the range increment of these weapons.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  WINGBIND  Evocation [Force] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Medium (100 ft. + 10 ft./level) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Theﬂyingcreatureletsoutasurprisedhowl andthenplummetstotheground,itswings ﬂat against its body and struggling against a green glowing net. A web of force surrounds the target, entangling it like a net. This spell functions like earthbind (page 76), except that an ensnared creature immediately falls to the ground, taking falling damage. An entangled creature can escape with a successful Escape Artist check against a DC equal to the save DC of the spell. Like a wall of force (PH 298), this web of force is impervious to most attacks: It is immune to damage of all kinds, cannot be burst with  a Strength check, and is unaffected by most spells, including dispel magic. Also like a wall of force, the web is immediately destroyed by disintegrate, a rod of cancellation, a sphere of annihilation, or Mordenkainen’s disjunction.  WINGED MOUNT  Transmutation Level: Blackguard 4, paladin 4 Component: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Your touched special mount Duration: 10 minutes/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Youtouchyourspecialmountanditsprouts giant, feathery white wings. This spell grants your special mount a ﬂy speed of 60 feet (good). The mount is slowed as normal because of weight carried, barding worn, and environmental factors.  WINGS OF AIR  Transmutation Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch  Target: Winged creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None (harmless) Spell Resistance: No (harmless) Youplaceyourhandonthecreature’sshoulders,andawarmyellowradianceinfusesit, spreading out to the tips of its wings. The creature you touch becomes more agile in the air, able to make quicker turns, and more maneuverable when ﬂying. The subject must be capable of ﬂight using wings. The creature’s maneuverability improves by one grade—from clumsy to poor, poor to average, average to good, or good to perfect. A single creature cannot beneﬁt from multiple applications of this spell at one time.  WINGS OF AIR, GREATER  Transmutation Level: Druid 4, sorcerer/wizard 4 This spell functions like wings of air, except that the creature’s maneuverability improves by two grades—from clumsy to average, poor to good, or average to perfect.  WINGS OF THE SEA  Transmutation Level: Cleric 1, druid 1, ranger 1, sorcerer/wizard 1 Components: S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless)  240  The wind tunnel spell guides ranged attacks to their targets  Thewebbingbetweenyourﬁngersgrowsto reachyourﬁngertipsasyoucompletethespell.  In the instant you touch the spell’s intended subject,however,thewebbingbetweenyour ﬁngersreturnstonormalevenasthesubject’s means of watery movement grow.  Transmutation [Cold] Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Deathbound 4 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: Limbs of one humanoid Duration: Permanent  WOOD ROT  WINTER’S EMBRACE  A target that fails its save takes 1d8 points of cold damage per round at the beginning of your turn. Each round, the subject can make a new Fortitude saving throw to avoid taking damage  Wood rot destroys wooden items and harms plant creatures  Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Uttering a rumbling phrase, you point at yourfoeandwatchwithdelightasitslimbs wither and twist, becoming useless. You choose to wither either the arms or the legs of a humanoid. Withered legs force a subject to fall prone while at the same time reducing the subject’s land speed to 5 feet. Withered arms make it impossible for the subject to use objects or cast spells with somatic components. A withered limb can be restored to  Illus. by C. Dien  Your successful melee touch attack deals 1 point of Strength damage and 1 point of Constitution damage per two caster levels to the target (maximum of 10 points each). If you score a critical hit, the subject takes ability drain instead, but the effect is not doubled.  The target creature must succeed on a Fortitude save or take 1d6 points of cold damage and become fatigued. A creature with immunity to cold is not affected by this spell.  You clutch at the air as though grabbing a nearby creature, and then you blow on yourﬁst.Asyoudoso,iceandsnowappear around your foe.  Necromancy Level: Cleric 7 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Living creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes Ablackshroudofmagicalenergysurrounds yourhands.Beneaththeshroudyourhands look withered and aged, like uncared-for ancient leather on the verge of crumbling to dust.  You makes a sound like whistling wind and inscribe a snowﬂake shape in the air, willing a chill to overcome your foe.  Evocation [Cold] Level: Druid 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One creature Duration: 1 round/level Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  WITHERING PALM  CHAPTER 1  WINTER CHILL  WITHER LIMB  normal by a successful dispel magic from a spellcaster of a level higher than the level of the wither limb caster.  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  This spell increases the touched creature’s swim speed by 30 feet. It has no effect on other modes of movement, nor does it give the subject a swim speed if it does not already have one. Material Component: A drop of water.  that round. The second time a subject takes damage from a single casting of winter’s embrace, it becomes fatigued. The fourth time it takes damage from the same spell, it becomes exhausted.  Transmutation Level: Druid 4 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: One nonmagical wooden object or a volume of wood; or one plant creature Duration: Instantaneous or 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No By crushing a live termite between your teeth and reciting the necessary words of power, you ﬁnish casting the spell. When you cast this spell, an insidious rot immediately taints any wooden object or plant creature you touch. Any unattended nonmagical wooden item smaller than 6 feet in diameter, or a 3-foot-radius volume of a larger wooden object (such as a wooden door), is instantly destroyed by wood rot.  241  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  In combat, you can use the spell to attempt to sunder any wooden or wooden-hafted weapon; the weapon or its wooden portion is destroyed on a successful melee touch attack. Attempting to sunder a weapon generally provokes attacks of opportunity, and wood rot has no effect on wooden or wooden-hafted weapons that strike you, even if you hold the charge. Against wooden shields or armor, you also make a melee touch attack. Such targets too large to be destroyed outright take a –1d6 penalty to their armor or shield bonus on a successful hit and are rendered unusable if the penalty exceeds the bonus. Any attack against a wooden object discharges the spell, and wooden magic items are immune to the effect of wood rot. Against plant creatures, wood rot deals 3d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +15) on a successful attack. Against plant creatures, the spell lasts for 1 round per level, and you can make one melee touch attack per round. Once it is used to make an attack against a plant creature, wood rot cannot be used to attack or destroy wooden items. Material Component: A live termite.  WOOD WOSE  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Druid 1 Components: V, S, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Effect: One nature servant Duration: 1 hour/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: No Whistling up nature’s power and waving a branch of holly, you create a helper for the task at hand.  242  A wood wose is a translucent green nature spirit that you can command to perform simple natural tasks. It can build a campﬁre, gather herbs, feed an animal companion, catch a ﬁsh, or perform any other simple task that doesn’t involve knowledge of technology. It cannot, for example, open a latched chest, since it doesn’t know how a latch works. A wood wose can perform only one activity at a time, but it repeats the same activity if told to do so. Thus, if you commanded it to gather leaves, it would continue to do so while you  turned your attention elsewhere, as long as you remained within range. A wood wose has an effective Strength of 2, so it can lift 20 pounds or drag 100 pounds. It can trigger traps, but the 20 pounds of force it can exert is not enough to activate most pressure plates. It has a land speed of 15 feet and a ﬂy speed of 15 feet (perfect). A wood wose cannot attack in any way; it is never allowed an attack roll or a saving throw. It cannot be killed, but it dissipates if it takes 6 points of damage from area attacks. If you attempt to send the wose beyond the spell’s range (measured from your current position), it ceases to exist.  WORD OF BALANCE  Evocation [Sonic] Level: Balance 7, druid 7 Components: V Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: 30 ft. Targets: Creatures in a 30-ft.-radius spread centered on you Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: None or Will negates; see text Spell Resistance: Yes Youuttertheelderwordsofbalance.Those who stray too far from the path of evenhandedness pay the price for their sins as the words judge them. Any lawful good, chaotic good, lawful evil, or chaotic evil creature that hears a word of balance suffers ill effects according to its Hit Dice, as given below, with no saving throw. These effects are cumulative. HD Equal to caster level Up to caster level –1  Effect Nauseated Weakened, nauseated Up to caster level –5 Paralyzed, weakened, nauseated Up to caster level –10 Killed Nauseated: The creature is limited to a single move action for 1 round but can defend itself normally. Weakened: The creature’s Strength decreases by 2d6 points for 2d4 rounds. Paralyzed: The creature is paralyzed and helpless for 1d10 minutes. Killed: The creature dies if living or is destroyed if undead.  If you are on your home plane when you cast this spell, every lawful good, chaotic good, lawful evil, and chaotic evil elemental and outsider within the area is instantly banished back to its home plane unless it makes a successful Will saving throw at a –4 penalty. Creatures so banished cannot return for at least 24 hours. The banishment effect occurs whether or not the creatures actually hear the word of balance, though those that do also suffer the appropriate effects (see above). Creatures whose HD exceed your caster level are unaffected by word of balance.  WORD OF BINDING  Conjuration (Creation) Level: Paladin 3 Components: V, DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./level) Target: One Medium or smaller humanoid or monstrous humanoid Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: Reﬂex negates Spell Resistance: Yes When you cast this spell and call to the target, shining steel manacles appear around its wrists and ankles. You create masterwork steel manacles that attempt to bind your target. A successful Reﬂex save allows the target to dodge the forming manacles; otherwise it is bound at its wrists and ankles. The imprisoned creature can slip free with a DC 35 Escape Artist check or a DC 28 Strength check. The manacles have hardness 10 and hit points equal to 10 + 1 per caster level. The manacles automatically scale to ﬁt any Medium or smaller humanoid creature. While imprisoned by the manacles, the subject cannot take any actions requiring the use of its hands and can move only 5 feet per round. The manacles come complete with an average quality lock (Open Lock DC 25).  WOUNDING WHISPERS Abjuration [Sonic] Level: Bard 3 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level (D)  Thewordsofthisspellproducehissing,sibilant echoes that spin around you, invoking doom upon those who dare to harm you.  Withtheﬁnalwordofthespell,yourchosen foeiswrackedwithsuchpainthatitdoubles overandcollapses.Itsfaceandhandsblister anddripﬂuid,anditseyescloudwithblood, rendering it blind. Your touch causes your target to experience excruciating pain. For the duration of the spell, the subject falls prone and is blinded and helpless. Even when the spell ends, the subject is still shaken for 3d10 minutes.  WRACKING TOUCH  Necromancy Level: Druid 2, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: Instantaneous Saving Throw: Fortitude half Spell Resistance: Yes You cry out with malice and clench your ﬁst,completingthespell.Thespell’sterrible energy causes your ﬁst to shake involuntarily, sending spasms up your arm.  The wraithstrike spell gives a spellcaster the ability to bypass armor  You lay your hand upon a creature and deal 1d6 points of damage +1 point per caster level (maximum +10). In addition, if you have the sneak attack ability, you also deal sneak attack damage to the affected creature unless the creature is immune to extra damage from critical hits. The creature still takes the spell damage even if it does not take the sneak attack damage. Unlike a normal use of sneak attack, your target need not be ﬂanked or denied its Dexterity bonus to take sneak attack damage from this spell.  WRAITHSTRIKE  Transmutation Level: Assassin 3, sorcerer/wizard 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round By presenting your weapon with an overly dramatic ﬂourish and calling out with a sickly-sounding moan, you complete the spell. As you do so, your weapon becomes translucent almost to the point that you cannot see it, though it still weighs as heavily in your hand. While this spell is in effect, your melee attacks are resolved as melee touch attacks rather than normal melee attacks.  WRATHFUL CASTIGATION  Enchantment (Compulsion) [Mind-Affecting] Level: Sorcerer/wizard 8 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One living creature Duration: 1 round/level (D) Saving Throw: See text Spell Resistance: Yes  Illus. by W. O’Connor  Necromancy [Evil] Level: Cleric 4, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Target: One humanoid Duration: 1 round/level + 3d10 minutes; see text Saving Throw: Fortitude negates Spell Resistance: Yes  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  WRACK  CHAPTER 1  Any creature striking you with its body or a handheld weapon takes 1d6 points of sonic damage +1 point per caster level. If a creature has spell resistance, it applies to this damage. Weapons with reach, such as longspears, do not endanger their users in this way. You cannot use this spell to deal damage to another target (for instance, with an unarmed attack or by forcing the whispers against a target). Only if another creature touches you does the effect deal damage.  You brandish the whip, and your target begins to shake uncontrollably, then collapsesontheground,itsspasmseventually fading as it dies. This spell causes wracking pain and violent convulsions, ending in death. The target creature must make a Will save or writhe in pain, helpless, before it dies 1 round later at the start of your turn. A creature that makes the Will save must also succeed on a second Will save or be dazed and take a –4 penalty on saving throws for the duration of the spell. Focus: A whip.  243  SPELL DESCRIPTIONS  CHAPTER 1  XORN MOVEMENT  Transmutation Level: Sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, F Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Touch Target: Creature touched Duration: 1 round/level; see text Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) You concentrate on the piece of the xorn’s hide. As you intone the spell it begins to glow yellow, and then the glow spreads over your entire form. You complete the spellandslipeffortlesslybetweenthegaps intheearthitself,leavingnothingdisturbed in your wake.  The subject of this spell can move through natural earth and stone (but not worked stone, brick, or metal) as a xorn does, leaving behind no tunnel or sign of passage. Furthermore, the subject can breathe normally while entombed in earth and natural rock. A move earth spell cast on an area the subject occupies ﬂings it back 30 feet and stuns it for 1 round. A successful Fortitude save negates the stunning effect. Xorn movement lasts a minimum of 1 round/level. If the subject has not emerged into a large enough open space to contain its body comfortably when the spell expires, it is shunted off to the nearest such open space, taking 1d6 points of damage per 5 feet so traveled. Focus: A scale from a xorn’s hide.  ZEAL  Abjuration Level: Competition 2, blackguard 2, paladin 2 Components: V, S Casting Time: 1 swift action Range: Personal Target: You Duration: 1 round/level Youinvokeadivineshieldtoprotectyouas you close with a chosen opponent.  244  Choose a foe as you cast this spell. You gain a +4 deﬂection bonus to AC against all attacks of opportunity from opponents other than the chosen foe. Also, you can move through enemies as if they were allies for the duration  of this spell, as long as you ﬁnish your movement closer to your chosen foe than when you began it.  ZEALOT PACT  Evocation Level: Cleric 6, Competition 6, Pact 6 Components: V, S, DF, XP Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Touch Target: Willing living creature touched Duration: Permanent until triggered; then 1 round/level Saving Throw: Will negates (harmless) Spell Resistance: Yes (harmless) Bybindingthesubjecttoyourdeity,yougive it the ability to crush the deity’s enemies. Once this spell is cast, the zealot pact remains dormant until the subject successfully hits a foe whose alignment is exactly opposite that of your deity. The subject’s subsequent melee attacks gain a +4 bonus and deal double damage. Once the spell is active, the subject must attack foes of opposite alignment every round if able to do so, or the spell effect ends. The subject knows which creatures within 60 feet are of opposite alignment. If you create a zealot pact with a neutral deity (such as Obad-Hai), choose one alignment from among the following that triggers the zealot pact: lawful good, lawful evil, chaotic evil, or -chaotic good. A creature can be subject to only one zealot pact at a time. Casting zealot pact on a subject that already has an untriggered zealot pact voids the earlier pact. XP Cost: 500 XP.  ZONE OF RESPITE  Abjuration Level: Cleric 5, sorcerer/wizard 5 Components: V, S, M Casting Time: 2 rounds Range: 20 ft. Area: 20-ft.-radius emanation centered on you Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes Smearingbloodbetweenyourﬁngers,you inscribeawardintheairandcastthepower of that ward over a wide area.  You create a region that is temporarily protected against interplanar intrusion. This includes spells and abilities that use other planes, including dimension door, teleport, plane shift, and travel through such planes as the Astral Plane, the Ethereal Plane, and the Plane of Shadow. Summoning and calling spells do not function within a zone of respite, but summoned and called creatures outside a zone of respite can be sent inside it. Gate spells and other portals cannot be created within a zone of respite, but existing portals are unaffected by the spell. Creatures on coterminous or coexistent planes (DMG 150) must retreat to the edge of the zone of respite and cannot enter the corresponding area on the coterminous or coexistent plane. Material Component: A small amount of blood from a gorgon.  ZONE OF REVELATION  Divination Level: Cleric 5 Components: V, S, M/DF Casting Time: 1 standard action Range: Close (25 ft. + 5 ft./2 levels) Area: 5-ft.-radius/level emanation centered on a point in space Duration: 1 minute/level Saving Throw: None Spell Resistance: Yes After making a dramatic gesture and uttering a few words of power, you close your eyes and open them again, revealing all that is hidden. All creatures and objects within a zone of revelation are made visible. This includes invisible creatures, as well as those on coexistent planes such as the Ethereal Plane and the Plane of Shadow (DMG 150). Natives of these planes do not lose any abilities but are simply made visible. Zone of revelation suppresses but does not dispel invisibility, etherealness, or other spells. Once a formerly invisible object or creature leaves the area, it becomes invisible again. Ethereal creatures in the spell’s area become nonethereal until they move beyond the spell’s range. Arcane Material Component: A handful of dust from the grave clothes of an undead creature.  CHAPTER 2: SPELL LISTS  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Illus. by D. Martin  These lists summarize the spells described here. An M or F appearing at the end of a spell’s name in the spell lists denotes a spell with a costly material component or a focus component, respectively, that is not normally included in a spell component pouch. An X denotes a spell with an XP component paid by the caster.  ASSASSIN SPELLS 1ST-LEVEL ASSASSIN SPELLS  Critical Strike: For 1 round you gain +1d6 damage, doubled threat range, and +4 on attack rolls to conﬁrm critical threats. Dead End: Removes spoor of one creature/level. Distract Assailant: One creature is ﬂat-footed for 1 round. Ebon Eyes: Subject can see through magical darkness. Insightful Feint: Gain +10 on your next Bluff check to feint in combat. Instant Locksmith: Make Disable Device or Open Lock check at +2 as free action. Instant Search: Make Search check at +2 as free action. Lightfoot: Your move does not provoke attacks of opportunity for 1 round. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Shock and Awe: Flat-footed creatures get –10 on initiative.  Silent Portal: Negates sound from door or window. Sniper’s Shot: No range limit on next ranged sneak attack. Sticky Fingers: You get +10 on Sleight of Hand checks.  2ND-LEVEL ASSASSIN SPELLS  Absorb Weapon: Hide a weapon, gain a Bluff check with a +4 bonus on feint attempts when you draw it. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Fire Shuriken: Magical shuriken deal 3d6 ﬁre damage. Ice Knife: Magical shard of ice deals 2d8 cold damage plus 2 Dex damage, or deals 1d8 cold damage in 10-ft.-radius burst. Invisibility, Swift: You are invisible for 1 round or until you attack. Iron Silence: Armor touched has no armor check penalty on Hide and Move Silently for 1 hour/level. Marked Object: You gain bonus to track a speciﬁc being. Phantom FoeM: Subject is always ﬂanked by one creature. Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment.  245  Beastland Ferocity: Subject ﬁghts without penalty while disabled or dying. Amorphous Form: Subject becomes puddlelike and can Cheat: Caster rerolls when determining the success of a slip through cracks quickly. game of chance. Fangs of the Vampire King: Grow vampire fangs. Crabwalk: Touched creature gains bonus while charging. Find the Gap: Your attacks ignore armor and natural Critical Strike: For 1 round you gain +1d6 damage, armor. doubled threat range, and +4 on attack Spectral Weapon: Use quasi-real weapon to make touch rolls to conﬁrm critical threats. attacks. Dead End: Removes spoor of one Spider Poison: Touch deals 1d6 Str damage, repeats creature/level. in 1 minute. Distort Speech: Subject’s Wraithstrike: Your melee speech is 50% unintelligible, attacks strike as touch so it might miscast spells. attacks for 1 round. Distract: Subjects take –4 on Concentration, Listen, 4TH-LEVEL Search, and Spot. Expeditious Retreat, Swift: ASSASSIN SPELLS Your speed increases by Cursed Blade: Wounds 30 ft. for 1 round. dealt by weapon can’t be Focusing Chant: Gain +1 on healed without remove attack rolls, skill checks, curse. and ability checks. Heart Ripper: Kills living Guiding Light: +2 on ranged creature with up to your attacks against creatures caster level in HD. in illuminated area. Hide from Dragons: Dragons Healthful Rest: Subjects can’t perceive one subject/2 heal at twice the normal levels. rate. Implacable Pursuer: You Herald’s Call: Creatures know where prey is, as long of 5 HD or less within as it’s moving. 20 ft. slowed for 1 round. Shadow Form: Gain +4 on Improvisation: You gain Hide, Move Silently, and a pool of luck bonus Escape Artist checks, and points equal to twice your concealment; you can caster level and can spend move through obstacles them to improve attack if you have ranks in rolls, skill checks, and Escape Artist. ability checks. Shadow Phase: Subject Incite: Subjects can’t ready An assassin casts absorb weapon in order to becomes partially retain a secret advantage actions or delay. incorporeal. Inhibit: Subject delays until next round. Sniper’s Eye: Gain +10 Spot, darkvision, 60-ft. range for Insidious Rhythm: Subject has –4 penalty on sneak attacks, and death attacks with ranged weapons. Intelligence-based skill checks and Concentration Vulnerability: Reduces an opponent’s damage reduction. checks, and must make Concentration check to cast spells. Inspirational Boost: The bonuses granted by your inspire courage ability increase by 1. Invisibility, Swift: You are invisible for 1 round or until 0-LEVEL BARD SPELLS (CANTRIPS) you attack. Ghostharp: Object records, plays a song at your command. Ironguts: Subject gains +5 bonus on saving throws against Minor Disguise: Makes slight changes to your poison. Ironthunder Horn: Intense vibrations trip those in area. appearance. Songbird: Perform and gain +1 on your next Cha check. Joyful Noise: You negate silence in a 10-ft.-radius Stick: Glues an object weighing 5 pounds or less to another emanation for as long as you concentrate. object. Master’s Touch: You gain proﬁciency in a weapon or shield touched for 1 minute/level. Phantom Threat: Subject thinks it’s ﬂanked. 1ST-LEVEL BARD SPELLS Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Accelerated Movement: Balance, Climb, or Move Silently Serene Visage: Gain insight bonus on Bluff checks equal at normal speed with no penalty on skill check. to half your level. Amplify: Lowers Listen DC by 20. Shock and Awe: Flat-footed creatures get –10 on initiative. Appraising Touch: Gain +10 bonus on Appraise checks.  Illus. b M. Cotie  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  3RD-LEVEL ASSASSIN SPELLS  BARD SPELLS  246  Sticky Fingers: You get +10 on Sleight of Hand checks. Targeting Ray: You and allies are +1 to hit/3 levels against subject. Undersong: Make Perform checks instead of Concentration checks.  2ND-LEVEL BARD SPELLS  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Alarm, Greater F: As alarm, and it works on coexistent planes. Battle Hymn: Allies can reroll one Will save/round. Bladeweave: Your melee attack dazes your opponent. BoneﬁddleF: Spectral ﬁddle bow deals 3d6 damage/round. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Cloak Pool: Hide a color pool on the Astral Plane from view. Cloud of Bewilderment: Generates a nauseating 10-ftcube. Curse of Impending Blades: Subject takes –2 penalty to AC. Dark Way: Creates temporary unbreakable bridge supporting up to 200 lb./level. Delusions of Grandeur: Subject thinks it is better than it is. Discolor Pool: Change the color of a color pool on the Astral Plane. Disquietude: Subject avoids physical contact with others. Dissonant Chant: Concentration checks more difﬁcult within area of spell. Distracting Ray: Ray forces spellcaster to make Concentration check. Entice Gift: Subject gives caster what it’s holding. Fly, Swift: Gain ﬂy speed of 60 ft. for 1 round. Grace: Silvery light grants +2 Dexterity, +10 feet to land speed, melee attacks treated as good; take –20 to Hide checks. Harmonic Chorus: Give another caster +2 to caster level and +2 on save DCs as long as you concentrate. Heartﬁre: Subjects outlined by ﬁre, take 1d4 damage/ round. Iron Silence: Armor touched has no armor check penalty on Hide and Move Silently for 1 hour/level. Know Vulnerabilities: Determine subject’s vulnerabilities and resistances. Lively Step: You and allies gain +10 increase to speed. Mesmerizing Glare: Your gaze fascinates creatures. Mindless Rage: Subject compelled to attack you physically for 1 round/level. Miser’s Envy: Subject jealously covets a nearby object. Nightmare Lullaby: Subject is confused. Portal Alarm: You are alerted when a creature passes through a warded portal. Reﬂective Disguise: Viewers see you as their own species and gender. Reveille: Dead creature speaks a short sentence about what caused its death. Sonic Weapon: Weapon touched deals +1d6 sonic damage with each hit. Sonic Whip: Whip of magical force keeps animals at bay and can frighten animals as ranged touch attack. Sonorous Hum: Removes need to concentrate to maintain next spell cast.  Speak to Allies: Subjects can converse at distance without moving lips. Sting Ray: Subject of ray can take only standard or move action, has –2 AC, and must make Concentration checks to cast spells. Summon Elysian Thrush: Summon an Elysian thrush, which accelerates natural healing. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Tactical Precision: Allies gain additional +2 bonus on attack rolls and +1d6 additional damage against ﬂanked foes. War Cry: Gain +4 on attack rolls and damage rolls if you charge. Any opponent you damage must save or become panicked for 1 round. Wave of Grief: Cone imposes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves. Weapon Shift: Touched weapon changes form. Whirling Blade: Hurled slashing weapon magically attacks all foes in 60-ft. line.  3RD-LEVEL BARD SPELLS  Allegro: You and your allies gain +30 ft. speed for 1 minute/level. Analyze Portal: Find a nearby portal and discover its properties. Creaking Cacophony: Sound distracts and makes foes vulnerable to sonic damage. Curse of Impending Blades, Mass: Enemies take –2 penalty to AC. Dirge of Discord: All within 20 ft. take –4 on attack rolls and Dexterity, and reduce speed by 50%. Dissonant Chord: Deal 1d8/2 levels sonic damage in 10-ft. burst. Dolorous Blow: Weapon’s threat range is doubled and threats are automatically conﬁrmed. G’elsewhere Chant: Teleport subject to random safe place within 100 ft. Haunting Tune: 1 subject/level becomes shaken. Hymn of Praise: Add +2 to caster level to all good divine casters within range. Infernal Threnody: Add +2 to caster level to all evil divine casters within range. Know Opponent: Learn strengths and weaknesses of foe. Listening Coin: You can eavesdrop through a magic coin. Love’s Lament: Cone deals 1d6 Wisdom damage and causes nausea. Puppeteer: Subject mimics your actions. Ray of Dizziness: Subject can take only move or standard actions. Shadow Cache: You open a small portal to the Plane of Shadow through which you can put an item for later retrieval. Speechlink: You and one other creature can talk, no matter how far apart. Suppress Breath Weapon: Subject can’t use breath weapon. Treasure Scent: You detect valuable metals and gems. Unluck: Subject remakes all rolls, uses worse result for 1 round/level.  247  Weapon of Impact: As keen edge, but aids bludgeoning weapons. Wounding Whispers: Sonic aura damages foes that strike you.  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  4TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS  248  Reﬂective Disguise, Mass: Viewers see subjects as their own species and gender. Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple subjects. Wail of Doom: Deal 1d4 damage/level in 30-ft. cone, plus subjects panicked or shaken.  Cacophonic Shield: Shield 10 ft. from you blocks sounds, deals 1d6 sonic damage +1/level, and deafens creatures 6TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS Dirge: Enemies take 2 points of Str and passing through. Celebration: Intoxicate subjects. Dex damage/round. Ethereal Mount: You conjure HindsightM: You see into the past. Nixie’s Grace: You swift mounts on the gain a swim speed, Ethereal Plane. FugueF: Your Perform water breathing, lowcheck creates variety of light vision, damage effects. reduction 5/cold iron, Lay of the Land: You and enhancements to gain an overview of the Dexterity and Wisdom. Ray of Light: Ray blinds geography around you. Ray Deﬂection: Ray subject. Revenance: Restores dead attacks are reﬂected creature to life for 1 away. Portal Alarm, Improved: minute/level. Resistance, Superior: Warded portal alerts you or a creature designated Subject gains +6 on by you to creatures saving throws. Symphonic NightmareM: passing through it. Protégé: Subject can use Discordant noise bardic music and bardic haunts subject’s sleep. knowledge as bard of half your level. Travel through the Ethereal Plane is faster Resistance, Greater: Subject on the back of an ethereal mount gains +3 on saving throws. Resonating Bolt: Sonic energy deals 1d4 damage/level (max 10d4). Ruin Delver’s Fortune: Cast on another creature’s turn 1ST-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELLS and choose one of several beneﬁts. Blessed Aim: +2 bonus for allies’ ranged attacks. Sirine’s Grace: You gain bonuses to Charisma and Divine Sacriﬁce: You sacriﬁce hit points to deal extra Dexterity, AC, and Perform checks, and can breathe damage. water. Golden Barding: Your mount gets force armor. Spectral Weapon: Use quasi-real weapon to make touch Faith Healing: Cures 8 hp +1/level (max +5) to worshiper attacks. of your deity. Stone Shatter: Shatter a stone object or creature. Know Greatest Enemy: Determines relative power level Voice of the Dragon: +10 on Bluff, Diplomacy, and of creatures within the area. Intimidate checks; can use one suggestion. Mark of the Outcast: Subject takes –5 penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and –2 penalty to AC. 5TH-LEVEL BARD SPELLS Resurgence: You grant subject a second chance at a saving Blink, Greater: Controlled blinking between the Material throw. Strategic Charge: Gain the beneﬁts of the Mobility feat. and Ethereal Planes grants defenses for 1 round/level. Body HarmonicF: Piercing tone deals 1d10 damage to one Summon Undead I: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. ability/round. Bolts of Bedevilment: One ray/round, dazes 1d3 rounds. Cacophonic Burst: Noise deals 1d6/level sonic damage to 2ND-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELLS all within area. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Dragonsight: Gain low-light vision, darkvision, and Curse of Ill Fortune: Subject takes –3 penalty on attacks, blindsense. checks, and saves. Hidden Lodge: Creates sturdy cottage camouﬂaged to Demonhide: Evil creature gains DR 10/cold iron or good. blend into natural surroundings. Hand of Divinity: Gives +2 sacred or profane bonus on Hide from Dragons: Dragons can’t perceive one subject/ saves to worshiper of your deity. 2 levels. Summon Undead II: Summons undead to ﬁght for you.  BLACKGUARD SPELLS  Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment. Wave of Grief: Cone imposes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves. Zeal: You move through foes to attack the enemy you want.  3RD-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELL  Implacable Pursuer: You know where prey is, as long as it’s moving. Revenance: Restores dead creature to life for 1 minute/ level. Summon Undead IV: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Visage of the Deity, Lesser: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. Winged Mount: Your mount grows wings and ﬂies at speed of 60 ft.  CLERIC SPELLS 0-LEVEL CLERIC SPELL (ORISON) Amanuensis: Copy nonmagical text.  1ST-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Anarchic Water M: Makes chaotic-aligned anarchic water. Axiomatic Water M: Makes lawful-aligned axiomatic water. Blessed Aim: +2 bonus for allies’ ranged attacks. Blood Wind: Subject uses natural weapon at range. Cold Fire: Fire becomes blue and white, emits cold. Conviction: Subject gains +2 or higher save bonus. Delay Disease: Ravages of disease staved off for a day. Dispel Ward: As dispel magic, but affects only wards. Ebon Eyes: Subject can see through magical darkness. Faith Healing: Cures 8 hp +1/level (max +5) to worshiper of your deity. Foundation of Stone: +2 AC, +4 bonus to resist bull rush and trip attacks. Grave Strike: You can sneak attack undead for 1 round. Guiding Light: +2 on ranged attacks against creatures in illuminated area. Healthful Rest: Subjects heal at twice the normal rate. Ice Gauntlet: A spiked gauntlet of ice forms around your ﬁst. Incite: Subjects can’t ready actions or delay. Inhibit: Subject delays until next round. Ironguts: Subject gains +5 bonus on saving throws against poison.  SPELL LISTS  4TH-LEVEL BLACKGUARD SPELLS  CHAPTER 2  Fangs of the Vampire King: Grow vampire fangs. Mantle of Evil: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with the good descriptor. Resurgence, Mass: As resurgence, but multiple subjects. Spiritual Chariot: Creates ghostly chariot behind your mount. Summon Undead III: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Unholy Storm M: Evil-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Weapon of the Deity: Your weapon gains enhancement bonus and special ability.  Light of Lunia: You radiate silvery light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage. Moon Lust: Subject obsesses about moon, is fascinated or dazzled. Nightshield: You gain resistance bonus on saves, and spell absorbs magic missile damage. Nimbus of Light: Light illuminates you until released as an attack. Omen of PerilF: You know how dangerous the future will be. Portal Beacon: You grant others knowledge of a magic portal’s location. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Resurgence: You grant subject a second chance at a saving throw. Sign: You gain +4 bonus on next initiative check. Snowshoes: Subject walks easily on ice and snow. Spell Flower: Hold the charge on one touch spell per forelimb. Summon Undead I: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Updraft: Column of wind lifts you aloft. Vigor, Lesser: Creature heals 1 hp/round (max 15 rounds). Vision of Glory: Subject gains morale bonus equal to your Cha modiﬁer to one saving throw. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed.  2ND-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Aura Against Flame: Ignores 10 ﬁre damage/round and extinguishes ﬁres. Avoid Planar Effects: Provides temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Balor Nimbus: Your ﬂaming body damages foes in grapple. Body Blades: You gain spikes, harm grapplers. Brambles: Wooden weapon grows spikes that deal +1 damage/level (max +10). Close Wounds: Cure 1d4 damage +1/level, even on another’s turn. Curse of Ill Fortune: Subject takes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves. Dark Way: Creates temporary unbreakable bridge supporting up to 200 lb./level. Deiﬁc Vengeance: Deity’s punishment deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). Divine Insight: You gain insight bonus of 5 + caster level on one single skill check. Divine Interdiction: Turn/rebuke attempts fail within the area. Divine Protection: Allies gain +1 to AC, saves. Energized Shield, Lesser: Shield provides user resistance 5, shield bash deals +1d6 damage. Extend Tentacles: +5 ft. to reach of tentacle attack. Frost Breath: Icy breath deals 1d4 damage/2 levels. Fuse Arms: Multiple arms/tentacles become one pair of stronger limbs. Ghost Touch Armor: Armor works normally against incorporeal attacks. Hand of Divinity: Gives +2 sacred or profane bonus to worshiper of your deity.  249  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Healing Lorecall: If you have 5 or more ranks in Heal, you can remove harmful conditions with conjuration (healing) spells. Infernal Wound: Weapon deals persistent, bleeding wounds. Inky Cloud: Obscures sight underwater beyond 5 ft. Iron Silence: Armor touched has no armor check penalty on Hide and Move Silently checks for 1 hour/level. Light of Mercuria: You radiate golden light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage, 2d6 against undead and evil outsiders. Living Undeath: Subject becomes immune to extra damage from critical hits and sneak attacks. Mark of the Outcast: Subject takes –5 penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and –2 penalty to AC. Protection from Negative Energy: Ignore 10 points of negative energy damage per attack. Protection from Positive Energy: Ignore 10 points of positive energy damage per attack. Quick March: Allies’ speed increases by 30 ft. for 1 round. Shroud of Undeath: Negative energy shroud makes undead perceive you as undead. Spawn Screen: Subject resists being transformed into an undead spawn if slain. Spell Immunity, Lesser: As spell immunity, but only 1stand 2nd-level spells. Stabilize: Cures 1 point of damage to all creatures in area. Stone Bones: Corporeal undead gains +3 natural armor bonus. Summon Elysian Thrush: Summon an Elysian thrush, which accelerates natural healing. Summon Undead II: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment. Wave of Grief: Cone imposes –3 penalty on attacks, checks, and saves.  3RD-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  250  Aid, Mass: Allies gain +1 on attack rolls, +1 against fear, 1d8 temporary hp +1/level (max +15). Air Breathing: Subjects can breathe air freely. Align Weapon, Mass: Allies’ weapons become good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Anarchic Storm M: Chaotic-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Antidragon AuraM: Allies gain bonus to AC and saves against dragons. Attune Form: Grant creature temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Awaken Sin: Subject faces its sins, takes 1d6 nonlethal damage/level (10d6 max). Axiomatic Storm M: Lawful-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Blindsight: Subject gains blindsight 30 ft. for 1 minute/ level. Chain of Eyes: See through other creatures’ eyes. Checkmate’s Light: Your weapon becomes a +1 axiomatic weapon and bolsters the morale of allies. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Cloak of Bravery: You and your allies gain a bonus on saves against fear.  Clutch of Orcus: Deals 1d12 damage/round and paralyzes foe. Conviction, Mass: Allies gain +2 or higher save bonus. Corona of Cold: Aura of cold protects you, damages others. Darkﬁre: Dark ﬂames deal 1d6 damage/2 levels, touch or thrown. Demon Dirge: Demons are stunned and take 3d6 damage/ round for 1d4 rounds. Devil Blight: Damage and stun baatezu; damage other lawful and evil creatures. Downdraft: Flying creatures knocked down. Energized Shield: Shield provides user resistance 10, shield bash deals +2d6 damage. Energy Vortex: Burst of energy centered on you damages nearby creatures. Favorable SacriﬁceM: Subject gains better protection the more gems you sacriﬁce. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Flame of Faith: Gives weapon the ﬂaming burst special ability. Ghost Touch Weapon: Weapon works normally against incorporeal creatures. Girallon’s Blessing: Subject gains one additional pair of arms. Grace: Silvery light grants +2 Dexterity, +10 feet to land speed, melee attacks treated as good; take –20 to Hide checks. Hamatula Barbs: Subjects grow barbs, which damage foes that attack subject in melee. Holy Storm M: Good-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Ice Axe: You create a battleaxe made of ice. Interplanar Message: You send a short mental message that can reach a subject regardless of planar boundaries. Knight’s Move: You instantly move to ﬂank a subject. Know Opponent: Learn strengths and weaknesses of foe. Know Vulnerabilities: Determine subject’s vulnerabilities and resistances. Light of Venya: You radiate pearly light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 2d6 damage, 4d6 against undead and evil outsiders. Mantle of Chaos/Evil/Good/Law: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with opposite alignment descriptor. Nauseating Breath: Exhale a cone of nauseating gas. Rejuvenative Corpse: Negative energy ﬁlls corpse, feeding undead healed. Resist Energy, Mass: Creatures ignore damage from speciﬁed energy type. Resurgence, Mass: As resurgence, but multiple subjects. Ring of Blades: Blades surround you, damaging other creatures (1d6 damage +1/level). Safety: Touched creature knows shortest route to safety. Shield of Warding: Shield grants +1 bonus on AC and Reﬂex saves/5 levels (max +5). Sink: Subject sinks in water, must make Swim checks. Skull Watch: Skull shrieks when creature enters warded area. Slashing Darkness: Ray deals 1d8/2 levels damage or heals undead the same amount.  Illus. by C. Frank  Assay Spell Resistance: +10 bonus on caster level checks to defeat one creature’s spell resistance. Astral HospiceM: While on the Astral Plane, open a portal to a demiplane so natural healing can occur. Blindsight, Greater: Subject gains blindsight 60 ft. for 1 minute/level. Castigate: Verbal rebuke damages those whose alignment differs from yours. Consumptive Field: Draw life from all creatures in 30-ft. radius with –1 or fewer hit points. Contingent Energy Resistance: Energy damage triggers a resist energy spell. Delay Death: Losing hit points doesn’t kill subject. Glowing OrbF: Creates permanent magical light; you control brightness. Hand of the Faithful: Immobile zone of warding stuns those worshiping different deities from yours. Holy Transformation, Lesser: You change into protectar, gain abilities. Hypothermia: Causes 1d6 cold damage/level, fatigue. Infernal Transformation, Lesser: You change into bearded devil, gain abilities. Iron Bones: Corporeal undead gains +6 natural armor bonus. Life Ward: Grants immunity to healing spells and positive energy effects. Make Manifest: You cause a creature on a coexistent plane to appear on your plane. Moon Bolt: 1d4 Strength damage/3 levels; undead made helpless. Negative Energy Aura: 10-ft. radius surrounding you deals 1 hp/3 levels for 1 round/level. Panacea: Removes most afﬂictions.  SPELL LISTS  4TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Planar Exchange, Lesser: Trade places with one of four lesser planar creatures (your choice). Planar Tolerance: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Positive Energy Aura: 10-ft. radius surrounding you heals 1 hp/3 levels for 1 round/level. Recitation: Your allies get bonus on AC, attacks and saves. Resistance, Greater: Subject gains +3 on saving throws. Revenance: Restores dead creature to life for 1 minute/ level. Shadowblast: Blast of light stuns and damages natives to the Plane of Shadow. Sheltered Vitality: Subject gains immunity to fatigue, exhaustion, ability damage, and ability drain. Shield of Faith, Mass: Allies gain +3 or higher AC bonus. Sound Lance: Sonic energy deals 1d8/level damage. Spell Vulnerability: Reduce creature’s spell resistance by 1/caster level (max reduction 15). Summon Hound Archon: Summon a hound archon to follow your commands. Summon Undead IV: Summons undead to ﬁght for you.  CHAPTER 2  Snowshoes, Mass: As snowshoes, affects one creature/ level. Sonorous Hum: Removes need to concentrate to maintain next spell cast. Spark of Life: Undead creature loses most immunities. Spikes: As brambles, but weapon gains +2 bonus and doubled threat range. Summon Undead III: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Suppress Glyph: You notice but do not trigger magical writing traps. Tremor: Subjects knocked prone. Unholy Storm M: Evil-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Vigor: As lesser vigor, but 2 hp/round (max 25 rounds). Vigor, Mass Lesser: As lesser vigor, but multiple subjects (max 25 rounds). Visage of the Deity, Lesser: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. Wall of Light: Creates wall of light, can dazzle creatures. Weapon of Energy: Weapon deals extra energy damage. Weapon of Impact: As keen edge, but aids bludgeoning weapons. Weapon of the Deity: Your weapon gains enhancement bonus and special ability.  Devil blight is the perfect spell for dealing with baatezu  251  Undead Bane Weapon: Weapon gains undead bane property and is considered good-aligned. Wall of Chaos/Evil/Good/Law: Wall blocks creatures of opposite alignment. Wall of Sand: Swirling sand blocks ranged attacks, slows movement through. Wrack: Renders creature helpless with pain.  Illus. by M. Cotie  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  5TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  252  Symbol of Spell Loss: Triggered rune absorbs spells yet to be cast. Triadspell: Cast a prepared spell three times. Vigor, Greater: As lesser vigor, but 4 hp/round. Vulnerability: Reduces an opponent’s damage reduction. Wall of Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall become subjects of targeted dispel magic. Zone of Respite: Prevents teleportation and similar effects from functioning in the area. Zone of Revelation: Makes invisible and ethereal creatures visible.  Aura of Evasion M: All within 10 ft. gain evasion against breath weapons. Blistering Radiance: Light dazzles creatures, deals 2d6 6TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS ﬁre damage in 50-ft.-radius spread. Call ZelekhutX: A zelekhut performs one Barghest’s FeastM: Destroy corpse, duty for you. potentially preventing its return to life. Contagion, Mass: As contagion, but Bolt of Glory: Positive energy 20-ft. radius. ray deals extra damage to evil Crawling Darkness: Shroud of outsiders and undead. tentacles conceals and protects Cold Snap: You lower you. temperature in area. Curse of Ill Fortune, Mass: Cometfall: Comet falls atop foes, damaging them and Enemies take –2 penalty knocking them prone. on attack rolls and saves. Death Throes: Your body Energy Immunity: Subject and equipment explodes when you die. Divine Agility: Subject gain immunity to gains +10 to Dexterity for damage of speciﬁed 1 round/level. energy type. Doomtide: Black mist Ghost Trap: Incorporeal obscures sight, dazes creatures turn those inside. corporeal. Dragon Breath: You Hide the Path F: Area choose a dragon type and warded against mimic its breath weapon. divinations. Earth Reaver: Eruption Ice Flowers: Ice and earth deals 7d6 damage to all deal 1d6 damage/level. Lucent Lance: Ambient in area. Incorporeal Nova: light forms lance, deals various damage. Destroy incorporeal Make Manifest, Mass: undead. Life’s Grace: Grants As make manifest but immunity to many affecting all creatures Clerics prepare for the day by praying for spells undead attacks and in the area. Mantle of the Icy SoulM: Touched creature gains the cold protection against incorporeal attacks. RevivifyM: Restore recently dead to life with no level loss. subtype. Righteous Wrath of the Faithful: Your allies gain extra Opalescent Glare: Kill creatures with a look, or make attack, +3 on attack rolls and damage rolls. them very afraid. Sanctuary, Mass: One creature/level can’t be attacked, Planar Exchange: Trade places with one of three planar and can’t attack. creatures (your choice). Stalwart PactM: You gain combat bonuses automatically Rejection: Creatures within cone are blasted away from when reduced to half hit points or lower. you. Stone Shape, Greater: Sculpts 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./level of Revive Outsider M: You restore life to a dead outsider. stone into any shape. Sarcophagus of Stone: Sarcophagus entombs subject. Subvert Planar Essence: Reduces subject’s damage Spider Plague: Summons Large monstrous spiders to ﬁght for you. reduction and spell resistance. Summon Bearded Devil: Summon a bearded devil to Stone Body: Your body becomes living stone. Summon Babau Demon: Summon a babau demon to follow your commands. Summon Bralani Eladrin: Summon a bralani eladrin to follow your commands. Resistance, Superior: Subject gains +6 on saving throws. follow your commands. Summon Undead V: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Vigorous Circle: As mass lesser vigor except 3 hp/round (max 40 rounds).  Visage of the Deity: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become celestial or ﬁendish. Zealot PactX: You automatically gain combat bonuses when you attack someone of opposite alignment.  7TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  Bodak’s GlareF: You slay a creature, which turns into a bodak 24 hours later. Brilliant Aura: Allies’ weapons become brilliant energy, ignoring armor. Death PactM: Deity brings subject back from the dead automatically. Death Ward, Mass: As death ward, but more subjects. Fierce Pride of the Beastlands: Summon celestial lions and celestial dire lions to follow your commands. General of Undeath: Increases your maximum HD of controlled undead by your level. Heat Drain: Subjects take 1d6 cold damage/level, you gain equal amount hp.  Abyssal Army: Summons demons to ﬁght for you. Awaken ConstructX: Construct gains humanlike sentience. Call MarutX: A marut performs one duty for you. Heavenly Host: Summons archons to ﬁght for you. Hellish Horde: Summons devils to ﬁght for you. Hunters of HadesM: Summons a pair of pack ﬁends or a retriever to follow your commands. Plague of Undead M: Animates horde of undead. Summon Elemental Monolith M: Calls powerful elemental creature to ﬁght for you. Undeath’s Eternal Foe: Subjects receive negative energy protection and immunity to most undead special attacks. Vile Death MX: Undead creature gains ﬁendish template. Visage of the Deity, Greater: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish.  SPELL LISTS  8TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  9TH-LEVEL CLERIC SPELLS  CHAPTER 2  Bestow Curse, Greater: As bestow curse, but more severe penalties. Blood to Water: 2d6 Constitution damage to subjects. Brain Spider: Eavesdrop on thoughts of up to eight other creatures. Brilliant Blade: Weapon or projectiles shed light, ignore armor. Call KolyarutX: A kolyarut performs one duty for you. Consumptive Field, Greater: Draw life from all creatures in 30-ft. radius with 9 or fewer hit points. Death Dragon: You gain +4 natural armor, +4 deﬂection, and natural attacks. Energy Ebb: Give subject one negative level/round for 1 round/level. Evil Glare: Paralyze creatures with your glare. Fortunate Fate: Subject immediately receives a heal if it would be killed by damage. Holy Star: Mote of energy protects you, attacks foes. Holy Transformation: You change into hound archon, gain abilities. Infernal Transformation: You change into bone devil, gain abilities. Planar Bubble: Create bubble around creature that emulates its native planar environment. Plane Shift, Greater: Plane shift accurately to your desired destination. Radiant Assault: 1d6 damage/level, victims dazed or dazzled. Renewal PactM: Creature is automatically healed if adverse condition affects it. Restoration, MassM: As restoration, but multiple subjects. Slime Wave: Creates a 15-ft. spread of green slime. Spell Resistance, Mass: As spell resistance, but multiple subjects. Symphonic NightmareM: Discordant noise haunts subject’s sleep. Withering Palm: Touch attack deals 1 point Str damage plus 1 point Con damage/2 levels.  Lion’s Roar: Deals 1d8 points of damage/2 levels to enemies; allies get +1 on attacks and saves against fear, plus temporary hp. Planar Exchange, Greater: Trade places with one of three greater planar creatures (your choice). Stormrage: You can ﬂy and ﬁre lightning from your eyes. Veil of Undeath: You gain undead traits. Wall of Greater Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall become subjects of targeted greater dispel magic.  DRUID SPELLS 0-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS (ORISONS)  Dawn: Sleeping/unconscious creatures in area awaken. Naturewatch: As deathwatch, but on animals and plants.  1ST-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Animate Fire: Turn campﬁre into Small elemental. Animate Water: Turn quantity of water into Small elemental. Animate Wood: Turn Small or smaller wooden item into animated object. Aspect of the Wolf: You change into a wolf and gain some of its abilities. Aura Against Flame: Ignores 10 ﬁre damage/round and extinguishes ﬁres. Babau Slime: Secrete a body-covering acid that damages attacking foes. Beast Claws: Your hands become slashing natural weapons. Beastland Ferocity: Subject ﬁghts without penalty while disabled or dying. Beget Bogun MX: You create a Tiny nature servant. Branch to Branch: You gain +10 competence bonus on Climb checks in trees and can brachiate through forest. Breath of the Jungle: Fog makes poison and diseases harder to resist. Buoyant Lifting: Underwater creatures rise to surface. Camouﬂage: Grants +10 bonus on Hide checks.  253  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Claws of the Bear: Your hands become weapons that deal 1d8 damage. Climb Walls: Touched creature gains increased climbing ability. Cloudburst: Hampers vision and ranged attacks, puts out normal ﬁres. Cold Fire: Fire becomes blue and white, emits cold. Crabwalk: Touched creature gains bonus while charging. Deep Breath: Your lungs are ﬁlled with air. Delay Disease: Ravages of disease staved off for a day. Enrage Animal: Animal rages like barbarian, not fatigued. Foundation of Stone: +2 AC, +4 bonus to resist bull rush and trip attacks. Hawkeye: Increase range increments by 50%, +5 on Spot checks. Healthful Rest: Subjects heal at twice the normal rate. Horrible Taste: Touched creature or object nauseates biting or swallowing foes. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Omen of PerilF: You know how dangerous the future will be. Raging Flame: Fires burn twice as hot, half as long. Ram’s Might: Gain +2 to Strength and your unarmed attacks deal normal damage. Rapid Burrowing: +20 ft. to subject’s burrow speed. Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Sandblast: You ﬁre hot sand that deals 1d6 nonlethal damage, stuns enemies. Slow Burn: Fires burn twice as long. Snake’s Swiftness: Subject immediately makes one attack. Snowshoes: Subject walks easily on ice and snow. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Thunderhead: Small lightning bolts deal 1d6 damage/ round. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. Updraft: Column of wind lifts you aloft. Vigor, Lesser: Creature heals 1 hp/round (max 15 rounds). Vine Strike: You can sneak attack plant creatures for 1 round. Wall of Smoke: Wall of black smoke obscures vision and nauseates those who pass through. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed. Winter Chill: Creature takes 1d6 cold damage and is fatigued. Wood Wose: Nature spirit does simple tasks for you.  2ND-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  254  Align Fang: Natural weapon becomes good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Avoid Planar Effects: Provides temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Balancing Lorecall: You gain a +4 bonus on Balance checks and can balance on difﬁcult surfaces if you have 5 or more ranks in Balance.  Binding Winds: Air prevents subject from moving, hinders ranged attacks. Bite of the Wererat: You gain the Dexterity and attacks of a wererat. Blinding Spittle: Ranged touch attack blinds subject. Blood Frenzy: Grants extra use of rage. Body of the Sun: Your body emanates ﬁre, dealing 1d4 ﬁre damage/2 levels. Brambles: Wooden weapon grows spikes that deal +1 damage/level (max +10). Briar Web: Area slows creatures and thorns deal 1 point of damage/5 ft. moved. Burrow: Subject can burrow with a speed of 30 feet. Camouﬂage, Mass: As camouﬂage, but multiple subjects. Cloud Wings: +30 ft. to subject’s ﬂy speed. Countermoon: Forces lycanthrope to its natural form. Creeping ColdF: Creature feels chill that increases with each round. Daggerspell Stance: You gain +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if you make a full attack, SR 5 + caster level if you ﬁght defensively, and DR 5/magic if you use the total defense action. Decomposition: Wounds deal 3 extra points of damage each round. Earthbind: Subject creature can’t ﬂy. Earthen Grace: Subject takes only nonlethal damage from stone and earth. Earthfast: Doubles the hit points of stone structure or rock formation and increases hardness to 10. Easy Trail: You make a temporary trail through any kind of undergrowth. Embrace the Wild: You gain an animal’s senses for 10 minutes/level. Fins to Feet: Transforms tails and ﬁns into legs and feet. Frost Breath: Icy breath deals 1d4 damage/2 levels. Healing Lorecall: If you have 5 or more ranks in Heal, you can remove harmful conditions with conjuration (healing) spells. Healing Sting: Touch deals 1d12 damage +1/level; caster gains damage as hp. Heartﬁre: Subjects outlined by ﬁre, take 1d4 damage/ round. Kelpstrand: Strands of kelp grapple foes. Listening Lorecall: You gain +4 on Listen checks, plus blindsense or blindsight if you have 5 or more ranks in Listen. Mark of the Outcast: Subject takes –5 penalty on Bluff and Diplomacy checks and –2 penalty to AC. Master Air: You sprout insubstantial wings and can ﬂy. Mountain Stance: Subject becomes hard to move. Nature’s Favor: Animal touched gains luck bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls of +1/3 levels. One with the Land: Link with nature gives a +2 bonus on nature-related skill checks. Saltray: Ray deals 1d6 damage/2 levels and stuns. Scent: Grants the scent special ability. Share Husk: See and hear through the senses of a touched animal. Snake’s Swiftness, Mass: Allies each immediately make one attack.  Air Breathing: Subjects can breathe air freely. Align Fang, Mass: Allies’ natural weapons become good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Attune Form: Grant creature temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Bite of the Werewolf: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werewolf. Blindsight: Subject gains blindsight 30 ft. for 1 minute/ level. Bottle of SmokeF: Uncorking bottle creates fast horse made of smoke. Capricious Zephyr: Gale-force winds push creatures. Charge of the Triceratops: Subject grows horns and skull plate, gains gore attack. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Corona of Cold: Aura of cold protects you, damages others. Creaking Cacophony: Sound distracts and makes foes vulnerable to sonic damage. Crumble: You erode building or other structure. Dehydrate: Deals Con damage to subject. Downdraft: Flying creatures knocked down. Energy Vortex: Burst of energy centered on you damages nearby creatures. Entangling Staff: Quarterstaff can grapple and constrict foes. Fire Wings: Your arms become wings that enable ﬂight, deal 2d6 ﬁre damage. Fly, Swift: Gain ﬂy speed of 60 ft. for 1 round. Forestfold: Gain +10 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks in one type of terrain. Giant’s Wrath: Pebbles you throw become boulders. Girallon’s Blessing: Subject gains one additional pair of arms. Heatstroke: Subject creature takes nonlethal damage and becomes fatigued. Hypothermia: Causes 1d6 cold damage/level, fatigue. IcelanceF: Changes ice into lance, which attacks subject for 6d6 damage and stuns for 1d4 rounds. Infestation of Maggots: Touch attack deals 1d4 Con damage/round. Jagged Tooth: Doubles the critical threat range of natural weapons.  SPELL LISTS  3RD-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Junglerazer: Fey, vermin, plants, and animals take 1d10 damage/level. Lion’s Charge: You can make a full attack on a charge for 1 round. Nature’s Balance: You transfer 4 ability score points to the subject for 10 minutes/level. Nature’s RampartF: You mold the terrain to provide fortiﬁcations. Primal Form: You change into elemental, gain some abilities. Quillﬁre: Your hand sprouts poisonous quills useful for melee or ranged attacks. Resist Energy, Mass: Creatures ignore damage from speciﬁed energy type. Sink: Subject sinks in water, must make Swim checks. Snakebite: Your arm turns into poisonous snake you can use to attack. Snowshoes, Mass: As snowshoes, affects one creature/ level. Spiderskin: Subject gains increasing bonus to natural armor bonus, saves against poison, and Hide checks. Spikes: As brambles, but weapon gains +2 bonus and doubled threat range. Spirit Jaws: Ghostly jaws grapple creature, deal 2d6 damage. Standing Wave: Magically propels boat or swimming creature. Thornskin: Your unarmed attacks deal +1d6 damage; natural and unarmed attacks against you take 5 damage. Thunderous Roar: Roar deals 1d6 damage/2 levels, deafens. Treasure Scent: You detect valuable metals and gems. Tremor: Subjects knocked prone. Vigor: As lesser vigor, but 2 hp/round (max 25 rounds). Vigor, Mass Lesser: As lesser vigor, but multiple subjects (max 25 rounds). Vine Mine: Vines grow rapidly, giving various effects. Weather Eye: You accurate predict weather up to one week ahead.  CHAPTER 2  Splinterbolt: 4d6 piercing damage to subjects hit by ranged attack. Swim: Subject gains swim speed, +8 bonus on Swim checks. Tiger’s Tooth: One natural weapon of subject gets +1/4 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls (max +5) for 1 round. Train Animal: Affected animal gains additional tricks equal to 1/2 caster level for 1 hour/level. Wings of Air: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability improves by one step. Winter’s Embrace: Creature takes 1d8 cold damage/ round and might become exhausted. Wracking Touch: Deal 1d6 damage +1/level; you also deal sneak attack damage if you have any.  4TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Arc of Lightning: Line of electricity arcs between two creatures (1d6/level damage). Bite of the Wereboar: You gain the Strength and attacks of a wereboar. Blindsight, Greater: Subject gains blindsight 60 ft. for 1 minute/level. Burrow, Mass: As burrow, but affects 1/level subjects. Chain of Eyes: See through other creatures’ eyes. Contagious Touch: You infect one creature/round with chosen disease. Contingent Energy Resistance: Energy damage triggers a resist energy spell. Creeping Cold, Greater F: As creeping cold, but longer duration and more damage. Enhance Wild Shape: Your wild shape ability gains a bonus. Essence of the Raptor: Base speed becomes 60 feet, gain skill bonuses and scent. Eye of the Hurricane: Storm pushes creatures, calm at center.  255  Illus. by W. England  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  256  Jaws of the WolfF: One carving/2 levels turns into a worg. Wings of Air, Greater: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability Land Womb: You and one creature/level hide within the improves by two steps. Wood Rot: Destroy wooden items or deal 3d6 damage + earth. Languor: Ray slows subject and diminishes its Strength. 1/level (max +15) to plant creatures. Last Breath M: Reincarnate recently deceased creature with no level loss. 5TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS Lay of the Land: You gain an overview of the geography Anticold Sphere: Sphere hedges out cold creatures and around you. protects you from cold. Magic Fang, Superior: Your natural weapons gain +1 Bite of the Weretiger: You gain the Strength and attacks enhancement bonus/4 levels. of a weretiger. Miasma of Entropy: Rot Cloak of the Sea: Gain all natural materials blur,freedomofmovement, in 30-ft. cone-shaped and water breathing while burst. in water. Moon Bolt: 1d4 Strength Cold Snap: You lower damage/3 levels; temperature in area. undead made helpless. Contagion, Mass: As Murderous Mist: Steam contagion, but 20-ft. deals 2d6 damage, radius. blinds creatures. Dance of the Unicorn: Perinarch: Gain greater Purifying mist washes control over Limbo’s the air clean of smoke, morphic essence. dust, and poisons. Planar Tolerance: Dire Hunger: Subject Provides long-term grows fangs, attacks protection against creatures near it. overtly damaging Echo Skull: See, hear, planar traits. and speak through a Poison Vines: Vines prepared animal skull grow and poison for 1 hour/level. creatures stuck within Fireward: As quench, but them. also suppresses magical Resistance, Greater: ﬁre effects in affected Subject gains +3 on area. saving throws. Freeze: Ray immobilizes Rushing Waters: Wave subject and deals 6d6 makes bull rush attack. cold damage/round. Shadowblast: Blast of Heal Animal light stuns and damages Companion: As heal on natives to the Plane of your animal companion. Shadow. Most druids use a sprig of mistletoe or holly for their focus, but others Ice Flowers: Ice and Sheltered Vitality: choose a different symbol for their devotion to nature earth deal 1d6 damage/ Subject gains immunity level. to fatigue, exhaustion, ability damage, and ability drain. Inferno: Creature bursts into ﬂames and takes ﬁre damage Spark of Life: Undead creature loses most immunities. per round. Starvation: Hunger pangs deal 1d6 damage/level, cause Jungle’s Rapture: Curse causes 1d6 Dexterity drain. fatigue. Mantle of the Icy SoulM: Touched creature gains the cold Sudden Stalagmite: Impaling stalagmite damages and subtype. holds foes. Memory Rot: Spores deal 1d6 Int damage to subject, plus 1 Summon Elementite Swarm: Summon an elementite Int drain/round. swarm to follow your commands. Owl’s Insight: Subject gains Wis bonus equal to half your Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple level for 1 hour. subjects. Panacea: Removes most afﬂictions. Swim, Mass: As swim, but one creature/level. Phantom Stag: Magic stag appears for 1 hour/level. Vortex of Teeth: 3d8 points of damage due to force per Plant Body: Subject’s type changes to plant. round to all creatures in the area. Poison Thorns: You grow thorns that poison your Wall of Water: Creates shapeable transparent wall of attackers. water. Quill Blast: You ﬂing quills in spread, dealing damage and Wild Runner: Change into centaur, gain some abilities. imposing penalties. Wind at Back: Doubles overland speed of subjects for 12 Rejuvenation Cocoon: Energy cocoon shields creature, hours. then heals it.  Anger of the Noonday Sun: Blinds creatures within 20 ft., damages undead. Animate Snow: You animate snow to attack foes. Aspect of the Earth Hunter: Change into bulette and gain some of its abilities. Bite of the Werebear: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werebear. Blood Sirocco: Wind bowls over foes and draws away their blood. Cometfall: Comet falls atop foes, damaging them and knocking them prone. Dinosaur Stampede: Spectral dinosaurs deal 1d12 damage +1/level. Drown: Subject immediately begins to drown. Energy Immunity: Subject and equipment gain immunity to damage of speciﬁed energy type. Enveloping Cocoon: Entraps subject creature and denies save for attached spell. Extract Water Elemental: Pulls water from victim, forms water elemental. Fires of Purity: Subject bursts into magical ﬂame, becoming a dangerous weapon. Hide the Path F: Area warded against divinations. Hungry Gizzard: Gizzard engulfs victim, grapples and deals damage. Miasma: Gas ﬁlls creature’s mouth, suffocating it. Phantasmal Disorientation: Fools creature’s sense of direction, making movement difﬁcult. Stonehold: Stony arm trap grapples and damages creatures. Summon Greater Elemental: Summon a greater elemental to follow your commands. Resistance, Superior: Subject gains +6 on saving throws. Tidal Surge: Wave of water deals 1d6/level damage and bull rushes. Tortoise Shell: Creature gains +6 natural armor, +1/3 levels above 11th. Vigorous Circle: As mass lesser vigor, but 3 hp/round (max 40 rounds).  7TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Aura of Vitality: Subjects gain +4 to Str, Dex, and Con. Brilliant Blade: Weapon or projectiles shed light, ignore armor. Cloudwalkers: Subjects can ﬂy outdoors at speed of 60 ft. Master Earth: Travel through the earth to any location. Shifting Paths: Illusion hides path, creates false new path.  8TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Awaken, MassX: As awaken, but multiple creatures. Bombardment: Falling rocks deal 1d8 damage/level and bury subjects. Brilliant Aura: Allies’ weapons become brilliant energy, ignoring armor. Cocoon X: Preserves a corpse and reincarnates with no loss of level. Deadfall: Falling wood causes damage and knocks foes prone. Maelstrom: Water vortex traps and damages creatures and objects. Phantom Wolf: Incorporeal wolf ﬁghts for you. Red Tide: Nauseating water knocks foes prone and deals Strength damage. Stormrage: You can ﬂy and ﬁre lightning from your eyes. Unyielding Roots: Creature grows roots that keep it stationary and heal it every round.  SPELL LISTS  6TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Slime Wave: Creates a 15-ft. spread of green slime. Storm of Elemental Fury: Magic cloud creates windstorm, then hail of stones, then rainstorm, then ﬂame. Storm Tower: Swirling clouds absorb electricity and magic missiles and prevent ranged attacks. Swamp Lung: Water in lungs makes subject helpless, diseased. Waterspout: Waterspout you control picks up and damages foes. Word of Balance: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or nauseates nonneutral creatures.  CHAPTER 2  Sirine’s Grace: You gain bonuses to Charisma and Dexterity, AC, and Perform checks, and can breathe water. Stone Shape, Greater: Sculpts 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./level of stone into any shape. Swamp Stride: As tree stride, but with bodies of water. Vigor, Greater: As lesser vigor, but 4 hp/round. Wall of Sand: Swirling sand blocks ranged attacks, slows movement through. Wind Tunnel: Ranged weapons gain +5 bonus and double range increment.  9TH-LEVEL DRUID SPELLS  Cast in Stone: Petrifying gaze attack. Death Ward, Mass: As death ward, but more subjects. Drown, Mass: As drown, but affects multiple subjects. Nature’s Avatar: Animal gains +10 on attack rolls and damage rolls, haste, and 1d8 hp/level. Perinarch, Planar: Gain control over a small area of any divinely morphic plane. Phantom Bear: Incorporeal bear ﬁghts for you. Shadow Landscape: Makes natural terrain more dangerous, creates guardians that you command. Summon Elemental Monolith M: Calls powerful elemental creature to ﬁght for you. Transmute Rock to Lava: Transforms one 10-ft. cube with subsequent ﬁre damage and effects. Tsunami: Massive wave deals 1d6 damage/level. Undermaster M: You gain earth-related spell-like abilities. Whirlwind, Greater: As whirlwind, but larger and more destructive.  PALADIN SPELLS 1ST-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS  Axiomatic Water M: Makes lawful-aligned axiomatic water. Bless Weapon, Swift: Weapon strikes true against evil foes for 1 round. Blessed Aim: +2 bonus for allies’ ranged attacks.  257  Illus. by F. Vohwinkel  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  258  Clear Mind: +4 on saves against mind-affecting spells and abilities. Deafening Clang: Weapon deals sonic damage, deafens. Divine Sacriﬁce: You sacriﬁce hit points to deal extra damage. Energized Shield, Lesser: Shield provides user resistance 5, shield bash deals +1d6 damage. Faith Healing: Cures 8 hp +1/level (max +5) to worshiper of your deity. Find Temple: You know direction of your deity’s nearest temple. Golden Barding: Your mount gets force armor. Grave Strike: You can sneak attack undead for 1 round. Holy Spurs: Special mount’s speed increases by 40 ft. for 1 round. Know Greatest Enemy: Determines relative power level of creatures within the area. Lionheart: Subject gains immunity to fear. Moment of Clarity: Subject gains second save against mind-affecting spell or ability. One Mind, Lesser: You gain +4 on Spot and Listen checks while mounted. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Resurgence: You grant subject a second chance at a saving throw. Rhino’s Rush: Next charge deals double damage. Second Wind: Dispel fatigue, grant bonus on Constitution checks.  Sense Heretic: Glow reveals when evil creature is near. Silverbeard: You grow a hard silver beard that gives +2 bonus to armor. Sticky Saddle: You become stuck to special mount, gain +10 Ride checks. Strategic Charge: You gain the beneﬁts of the Mobility feat. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. Vision of Glory: Subject gains morale bonus equal to your Cha modiﬁer to one saving throw. Warning Shout: Allies are no longer ﬂat-footed.  2ND-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS  Angelskin: Lawful good creature gains DR 5/evil. Aura of Glory: Remove any fear effect from allies. Awaken Sin: Subject faces its sins, takes 1d6/level nonlethal damage (10d6 max). Checkmate’s Light: Your weapon becomes a +1 axiomatic weapon and bolsters the morale of allies. Cloak of Bravery: You and your allies gain a bonus on saves against fear. Divine Insight: You gain insight bonus of 5 + caster level on one single skill check. Divine Protection: Allies gain +1 to AC, saves. Energized Shield: Shield provides user resistance 10, shield bash deals +2d6 damage. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Flame of Faith: Gives weapon the ﬂaming burst special ability.  Spiritual chariot allows a mount to run unencumbered by the rider  SPELL LISTS  3RD-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS  Lawful Sword: Weapon becomes +5 axiomatic weapon and emits magic circle against chaos. Revenance: Restores dead creature to life for 1 minute/ level. Righteous Aura: You detonate on death, healing good creatures and damaging others (2d6/level damage). Sacred Haven: Creatures gain +2 AC, retain Dex bonus, and you can lay on hands at range. Telepathic Aura: One-way mental communication to allies within 100 feet. Visage of the Deity, Lesser: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. Winged Mount: Your mount grows wings and ﬂies at speed of 60 ft.  CHAPTER 2  Hand of Divinity: Gives +2 sacred or profane saving throw bonus to worshiper of your deity. Holy Mount: Special mount gains celestial template. Knight’s Move: You instantly move to ﬂank a subject. Loyal Vassal: Ally gains +3 against mind-affecting spells and abilities and cannot be compelled to harm you. One Mind: As lesser one mind, but also gain +2 to attack while mounted. Quick March: Allies’ speed increases by 30 ft. for 1 round. Shield of Warding: Shield grants +1 bonus on AC and Reﬂex saves/5 levels (max +5). Spiritual Chariot: Creates ghostly chariot behind your mount. Stabilize: Cures 1 point of damage to all creatures in area. Strength of Stone: +8 Str bonus that ends if you lose contact with the ground. Zeal: You move through foes to attack the enemy you want.  RANGER SPELLS 1ST-LEVEL  Illus. by R. Spears  Axiomatic Storm M: LawfulRANGER SPELLS aligned rain falls in 20-ft. Accelerated Movement: radius. Blessing of Bahamut: You Balance, Climb, or gain damage reduction Move Silently at 10/magic. normal speed with no Diamondsteel M: Metal armor penalty on skill check. Arrow Mind: You provides damage reduction. Find the Gap: Your attacks threaten nearby squares ignore armor and natural with your bow and ﬁre armor. without provoking attacks A ranger’s spells can make potent weapons Hand of the Faithful: Immobile zone of of opportunity. Aspect of the Wolf: You change warding stuns those worshiping different into a wolf and gain some of its abilities. deities from yours. Holy Storm M: Good-aligned rain falls in 20-ft. radius. Blades of Fire: Your melee weapons deal +1d8 ﬁre damage Mantle of Good/Law: You gain SR 12 + caster level for 1 round. Bloodhound: You gain an immediate retry if you fail a against spells with opposite alignment descriptor. One Mind, Greater: As one mind, but also gain +2 to Survival check while tracking. Branch to Branch: You gain +10 competence bonus on damage while mounted. Regal Procession: As mount, but you summon several Climb checks in trees and can brachiate through forest. Camouﬂage: Grants +10 bonus on Hide checks. mounts. Resurgence, Mass: As resurgence, but multiple subjects. Claws of the Bear: Your hands become weapons that deal Righteous Fury: Gain temporary hp, +4 to Strength. 1d8 damage. Seek Eternal Rest: Turn undead as cleric of your level. Climb Walls: Touched creature gains increased climbing Undead Bane Weapon: Weapon gains undead bane ability. Crabwalk: Touched creature gains bonus while charging. property and is considered good-aligned. Weapon of the Deity: Your weapon gains enhancement Dawn: Sleeping/unconscious creatures in area awaken. Deep Breath: Your lungs are ﬁlled with air. bonus and special ability. Word of Binding: Magical manacles restrain foe. Detect Favored Enemy: You know if favored enemies are within 60 ft. Easy Trail: You make a temporary trail through any kind 4TH-LEVEL PALADIN SPELLS of undergrowth. Castigate: Verbal rebuke damages those whose alignment Embrace the Wild: You gain an animal’s senses for 10 differs from yours. minutes/level. Draconic Might: Gain +5 to Str, Con, Cha; +4 natural Enrage Animal: Animal rages like barbarian, not armor; immunity to magic sleep effects and paralysis. fatigued. Favor of The Martyr: Subject gains immunity to Guided Shot: You ignore distance, cover, concealment nonlethal damage, charm and compulsion effects, and penalties with your ranged attacks for 1 round. other adverse conditions.  259  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Hawkeye: Increase range increments by 50%, +5 on Spot checks. Healing Lorecall: If you have 5 or more ranks in Heal, you can remove harmful conditions with conjuration (healing) spells. Horrible Taste: Touched creature or object nauseates biting or swallowing foes. Hunter’s Mercy: Your next hit with a bow is automatically a critical hit. Instant Search: Make Search check at +2 as free action. Lay of the Land: You gain an overview of the geography around you. Lightfoot: Your move does not provoke attacks of opportunity for 1 round. Living Prints: You perceive tracks as if they had just been made. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Marked Object: You gain bonus to track a speciﬁc being. Naturewatch: As deathwatch, but on animals and plants. Omen of PerilF: You know how dangerous the future will be. Ram’s Might: Gain +2 to Strength and your unarmed attacks deal normal damage. Rapid Burrowing: +20 ft. to subject’s burrow speed. Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Rhino’s Rush: Next charge deals double damage. Scent: Grants the scent special ability. Smell of Fear: Subject’s aroma attracts animal attacks. Sniper’s Shot: No range limit on next ranged sneak attack. Snowshoes: Subject walks easily on ice and snow. Stalking Brand: Subject marked with symbol you can see despite disguises. Surefoot: +10 bonus on Balance, Climb, Jump, and Tumble checks. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Towering Oak: +10 bonus on Intimidate checks. Traveler’s Mount: Creature moves faster but can’t attack. Vine Strike: You can sneak attack plant creatures for 1 round. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed.  2ND-LEVEL RANGER SPELLS  260  Align Fang: Natural weapon becomes good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Balancing Lorecall: You gain a +4 bonus on Balance checks and can balance on difﬁcult surfaces if you have 5 or more ranks in Balance. Briar Web: Area slows creatures and thorns deal 1 point of damage/5 ft. moved. Burrow: Subject can burrow with a speed of 30 feet. Camouﬂage, Mass: As camouﬂage, but multiple subjects. Curse of Impending Blades: Subject takes –2 penalty to AC. Easy Climb: You make a vertical surface easy to climb (DC 10).  Exacting Shot: Your ranged weapon automatically conﬁrms critical hits against favored enemies. Fell the Greatest Foe: Deal extra damage to creatures larger than you. Haste, Swift: Move faster, +1 on attacks, AC, Reﬂex saves. Jagged Tooth: Doubles the critical threat range of natural weapons. Lion’s Charge: You can make a full attack on a charge for 1 round. Listening Lorecall: You gain +4 on Listen checks, plus blindsense or blindsight if you have 5 or more ranks in Listen. Nature’s Favor: Animal touched gains luck bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls of +1/3 levels. One with the Land: Link with nature gives a +2 bonus on nature-related skill checks. Train Animal: Affected animal gains additional tricks equal to 1/2 caster level for 1 hour/level. Tremorsense: Grants tremorsense to a range of 30 feet.  3RD-LEVEL RANGER SPELLS  Align Fang, Mass: Allies’ natural weapons become good, evil, lawful, or chaotic. Arrow Storm: You make one ranged attack against each foe within one range increment. Blade Storm: You make melee attacks against every foe you threaten. Blade Thirst: Slashing weapon glows and gains +3 bonus. Bottle of SmokeF: Uncorking bottle creates fast horse made of smoke. Burrow, Mass: As burrow, but affects 1/level subjects. Charge of the Triceratops: Subject grows horns and skull plate, gains gore attack. Curse of Impending Blades, Mass: Enemies take –2 penalty to AC. Decoy Image: Figment mimics you and allies. Find the Gap: Your attacks ignore armor and natural armor. Forestfold: You gain +10 competence bonus on Hide and Move Silently checks in one type of terrain. Heal Animal Companion: As heal on your animal companion. Mark of the Hunter: Rune on creature makes it easier to attack. Nature’s RampartF: You mold the terrain to provide fortiﬁcations. Phantasmal Decoy: Creates illusory enemy for foe to chase. Safe Clearing: As sanctuary, but protects an area and lasts 1 hour/level. Snowshoes, Mass: As snowshoes, affects one creature/ level.  4TH-LEVEL RANGER SPELLS  Aspect of the Earth Hunter: Change into bulette and gain some of its abilities. Deeper Darkvision: Subject can see 90 ft. in magical darkness. Foebane: Your weapon becomes +5 and deals +2d6 damage against a favored enemy.  0-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS (CANTRIPS) Conj  Caltrops: Creates caltrops in 5-ft.-by-5-ft. square, + 5-ft. square/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5). Evoc Electric Jolt: Ranged touch attack deals 1d3 electricity damage. Sonic Snap: Subject takes 1 point of sonic damage and is deafened 1 round. Illus Silent Portal: Negates sound from door or window. Trans Amanuensis: Copy nonmagical text. Launch Bolt: Launches a crossbow bolt up to 80 ft. Launch Item: Hurls Fine item up to Medium range. Repair Minor Damage: Repairs 1 point of damage to any construct. Stick: Glues an object weighing 5 pounds or less to another object.  1ST-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Dispel Ward: As dispel magic, but affects only wards. Ectoplasmic Armor: Gain armor bonus against incorporeal touch attacks. Ironguts: Subject gains +5 bonus on saving throws against poison. Nightshield: You gain resistance bonus on saves, and spell absorbs magic missile damage. Resist Planar Alignment: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Conj Benign Transposition: Two willing subjects switch places. Blades of Fire: Your melee weapons deal +1d8 ﬁre damage for 1 round. Buzzing Bee: Bee gives subject –10 penalty on Move Silently and hinders Concentration checks.  SPELL LISTS  SORCERER/ WIZARD SPELLS  Corrosive Grasp: 1 touch/level deals 1d8 acid damage. Deep Breath: Your lungs are ﬁlled with air. Hail of StoneM: Stones deal 1d4 points of damage/ level to creatures in the area (max 5d4). Orb of Acid, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 acid damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Cold, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 cold damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Electricity, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 electricity damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Fire, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d8 ﬁre damage + 1d8/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d8). Orb of Sound, Lesser: Ranged touch attack deals 1d6 sonic damage + 1d6/2 levels beyond 1st (max 5d6). Summon Undead I: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Wall of Smoke: Wall of black smoke obscures vision and nauseates those who pass through. Appraising Touch: Gain +10 bonus on Appraise Div checks. Arrow Mind: You threaten nearby squares with your bow and ﬁre without provoking attacks of opportunity. Critical Strike: For 1 round you gain +1d6 damage, doubled threat range, and +4 on attack rolls to conﬁrm critical threats. Golem Strike: You can sneak attack constructs for 1 round. Guided Shot: You ignore distance, cover, concealment penalties with your ranged attacks for 1 round. Insightful Feint: Gain +10 on your next Bluff check to feint in combat. Instant Locksmith: Make Disable Device or Open Lock check at +2 as free action. Instant Search: Make Search check at +2 as free action. Master’s Touch: You gain proﬁciency in a weapon or shield touched for 1 minute/level. Sniper’s Shot: No range limit on next ranged sneak attack. Spontaneous Search: Instantly Search area as if having taken 10. Targeting Ray: You and allies are +1 to hit/3 levels against subject. Ench Distract: Subjects take –4 on Concentration, Listen, Search, and Spot. Distract Assailant: One creature is ﬂat-footed for 1 round. Incite: Subjects can’t ready actions or delay. Inhibit: Subject delays until next round. Shock and Awe: Flat-footed creatures get –10 on initiative. Evoc Blood Wind: Subject uses natural weapons at range.  CHAPTER 2  Implacable Pursuer: You know where prey is, as long as it’s moving. Land Womb: You and one creature/level hide within the earth. Magic Fang, Superior: Your natural weapons gain +1 enhancement bonus/4 levels. Planar Tolerance: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Snakebite: Your arm turns into poisonous snake you can use to attack. Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple subjects. Swamp Stride: As tree stride, but with bodies of water. Wild Runner: Change into centaur, gain some abilities.  261  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  262  Guiding Light: +2 on ranged attacks against creatures in illuminated area. Ice Dagger: Grenadelike weapon deals subject 1d4/level cold damage, plus area damage. Light of Lunia: You radiate silvery light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage. Luminous Gaze: Your eyes emit light, dazzle creatures. Persistent Blade: Blade of force attacks subject, automatically ﬂanks. Ray of Flame: Ray deals 1d6/2 levels ﬁre damage, ignites subject. Sonic Blast: Subject takes 1d4/2 levels sonic damage plus deafness. Thunderhead: Small lightning bolts deal 1 damage/round. Illus Dead End: Removes spoor of one creature/level. Net of Shadows: Ordinary shadows that provide concealment to all in the area. Serene Visage: Gain insight bonus on Bluff checks equal to half your level. Necro Backbiter: Weapon strikes wielder. Spirit Worm: Subject takes 1 point Con damage every round for 1 round/level. Trans Accelerated Movement: Balance, Climb, or Move Silently at normal speed with no penalty on skill check. Babau Slime: Secrete a body-covering acid that damages attacking foes. Breath Flare: Your breath weapon dazzles subjects. Cheat: Caster rerolls when determining the success of a game of chance. Cutting Hand: Your hand gains a +2 enhancement bonus and deals 1d6 damage. Ebon Eyes: Subject can see through magical darkness. Expeditious Retreat, Swift: Your speed increases by 30 ft. for 1 round. Fist of Stone: Gain +6 Str and natural slam attack. Horrible Taste: Touched creature or object nauseates biting or swallowing foes. Low-Light Vision: See twice as far as a human in poor illumination. Mage Hand, Greater: As mage hand, but medium range and up to 40 lb. Nerveskitter: Subject gains +5 bonus on initiative checks. Portal Beacon: You grant others knowledge of a magic portal’s location. Raging Flame: Fires burn twice as hot, half as long. Ray of Clumsiness: Victim takes 1d6 Dexterity penalty +1/2 levels. Remove Scent: Hides touched creature’s scent. Repair Light Damage: Repairs 1d8 damage +1/ level (max +5) to any construct. Scatterspray: Group of small objects ﬂies apart in a burst. Shieldbearer: Shield ﬂoats near subject to offer protection. Slide: Move subject 5 feet.  Univ  Slow Burn: Fires burn twice as long. Spell Flower: Hold the charge on one touch spell per forelimb. Weapon Shift: Touched weapon changes form. Wings of the Sea: +30 ft. to subject’s swim speed. Familiar Pocket: Garment or container becomes extradimensional safe haven for your familiar.  2ND-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Aiming at the Target: +10 bonus on Concentration checks for previously cast spell. Alarm, Greater F: As alarm, and it works on coexistent planes. Daggerspell Stance: You gain +2 insight bonus on attack rolls and damage rolls if you make a full attack, SR 5 + caster level if you ﬁght defensively, and DR 5/magic if you use the total defense action. Dissonant Chant: Concentration checks more difﬁcult within area of spell. Distracting Ray: Ray forces spellcaster to make Concentration check. Earth Lock M: Constricts tunnel, preventing access. Ectoplasmic Feedback: Incorporeal attackers take 1d6 damage + 1/level. Portal Alarm: You are alerted when a creature passes through a warded portal. Scintillating Scales: Your natural armor bonus turns into a deﬂection bonus. Conj Baleful Transposition: Two subjects switch places. Cloud of Bewilderment: Generates a nauseating 10-ft. cube. Create Magic TattooM: Subject receives a magic tattoo with various effects. Ice Knife: Magical shard of ice deals 2d8 cold damage plus 2 Dex damage, or deals 1d8 cold damage in 10-ft.-radius burst. Inky Cloud: Obscures sight underwater beyond 5 ft. Malevolent Miasma: Cloud of fog deals 1d4 nonlethal damage/level. Summon Undead II: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Balancing Lorecall: You gain a +4 bonus on Div Balance checks and can balance on difﬁcult surfaces if you have 5 or more ranks in Balance. Chain of Eyes: See through other creatures’ eyes. Discern Shapechanger M: Penetrates disguises and identiﬁes shapechanging creatures. Marked Object: You gain bonus to track a speciﬁc being. Ench Entice Gift: Subject gives caster what it’s holding. Mechanus Mind: Reformat subject’s mind to be coldly calculating. Mindless Rage: Subject compelled to attack you physically for 1 round/level.  SPELL LISTS  Few wooden doors can withstand a battering ram spell  CHAPTER 2  Necro BoneﬁddleF: Spectral ﬁddle bow deals 3d6 damage/round. Curse of Impending Blades: Subject takes –2 penalty to AC. Death Armor F: Black aura damages creatures attacking you. Desiccating Bubble: Globe of air damages by evaporating moisture from subject. Ghoul Glyph: Glyph wards area, paralyzes victims. Life Bolt: 1 ray/2 levels draws 1 hp from you to deal 1d12 damage to undead. Ray of Sickness: Subject becomes sickened. Ray of Weakness: Subject takes –2 on attacks, –10 ft. speed. Shroud of Undeath: Negative energy shroud makes undead perceive you as undead. Spawn Screen: Subject resists being transformed into an undead spawn if slain. Stolen Breath: Subject has wind knocked out of it. Wracking Touch: Deal 1d6 damage +1/level; you also deal sneak attack damage if you have any. Trans Augment Familiar: Your familiar becomes more powerful. Balor Nimbus: Your ﬂaming body damages foes in grapple. Belker Claws: Touch attack deals 2d12 damage and lingers +1 round/3 levels. Body of the Sun: Your body emanates ﬁre, dealing 1d4 ﬁre damage/2 levels. Bristle: Armor spikes attack with wearer. Earthbind: Subject creature can’t ﬂy. Earthen Grasp: Arm made of earth and soil grapples foes. Extend Tentacles: +5 ft. to reach of tentacle attack. Fearsome Grapple: You grow tentacles that help you grapple.  Illus. by J. Nelson  Ray of Stupidity: Victim takes 1d4+1 Intelligence damage. Rebuke: Subject is dazed 1 round, then shaken. Sting Ray: Subject of ray can take only standard or move action, has –2 AC, and must make Concentration checks to cast spells. Evoc Battering Ram: Deals 1d6 damage plus bull rush. Blast of Force: Attack deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). Burning Sword: Weapon gains ﬂaming burst special ability. Combust: Subject takes 1d8/level ﬁre damage and might catch ﬁre. Electric Loop: Deals 1d6/2 levels electricity damage plus stunning to a single creature. Ethereal Chamber: You entrap an ethereal subject in a chamber of force. Fireburst: Creatures within 10 feet take 1d8/level ﬁre damage. Flame Dagger: Beam of ﬁre deals 1d4 damage +1/ level. Force LadderF: Creates an immobile ladder of force. Frost Breath: Icy breath deals 1d4 damage/2 levels. Light of Mercuria: You radiate golden light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 1d6 damage, 2d6 against undead and evil outsiders. Rainbow Beam F: Ray dazzles and deals 1d12 damage/3 levels of random type. Ray of Ice: Ray deals 1d6 cold damage/2 levels. Scorch: Jet of ﬂame deals 1d8/2 levels (max 5d8). Slapping Hand: Hand makes creature provoke attacks of opportunity. Snowball Swarm: Snowballs deal 2d6 points of cold damage in 10-ft. burst. Veil of Shadow: Darkness grants you concealment. Illus Bladeweave: Your melee attack dazes your opponent. Cloak Pool: Hide a color pool on the Astral Plane from view. Dark Way: Creates temporary unbreakable bridge supporting up to 200 lb./level. Delusions of Grandeur: Subject thinks it is better than it is. Discolor Pool: Change the color of a color pool on the Astral Plane. Disguise Undead: Change appearance of one corporeal undead. Phantasmal Assailants: Nightmare creatures strike subject for 8 Wis damage, 8 Dex damage. Phantom FoeM: Subject is always ﬂanked by one creature. Reﬂective Disguise: Viewers see you as their own species and gender. Shadow Mask: Grants +4 on saves against light spells, protection from gaze attacks. Shadow Radiance: Area ﬁlled with intense light that grows brighter. Shadow Spray: Deals 4 points of Str damage and dazes. Wall of Gloom: Shadow barrier obscures vision.  263  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Fins to Feet: Transforms tails and ﬁns into legs and feet. Fly, Swift: Gain ﬂy speed of 60 ft. for 1 round. Fuse Arms: Multiple arms/tentacles become one pair of stronger limbs. Ghost Touch Armor: Armor works normally against incorporeal attacks. Heroics: Fighter gains one ﬁghter bonus feat. Hurl: Thrown weapon returns to thrower. Infernal Wound: Weapon deals persistent, bleeding wounds. Ironthunder Horn: Intense vibrations trip those in area. Lively Step: You and allies gain +10 increase to speed. Mountain Stance: Subject becomes hard to move. Quick Potion: Creates a potion that must be used within 1 hour/level. Razorfangs: Your bite or claw attack threatens a critical hit on a 19 or 20. Repair Moderate Damage: Repairs 2d8 damage +1/level (max +10) to any construct. Scale Weakening: Subject’s natural armor weakens. Slide, Greater: Move subject 20 feet. Snake’s Swiftness: Subject immediately makes one attack. Sonic Weapon: Weapon touched deals +1d6 sonic damage with each hit. Speak to Allies: Subjects can converse at distance without moving lips. Stone Bones: Corporeal undead gains +3 natural armor bonus. Surefooted Stride: You can move over rubble as easily as you can over open ground. Swim: Subject gains swim speed, +8 bonus on Swim checks. Whirling Blade: Hurled slashing weapon magically attacks all foes in 60-ft. line. Wings of Air: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability improves by one step. Wraithstrike: Your melee attacks strike as touch attacks for 1 round.  3RD-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELL  264  Abjur Anticipate Teleportation F: Predict and delay the arrival of creatures teleporting into range by 1 round. Antidragon AuraM: Allies gain bonus to AC and saves against dragons. Avoid Planar Effects: Provides temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Earthen Grace: Subject takes only nonlethal damage from stone and earth. Eradicate Earth: Deals 1d8 points of damage/level to earth creatures (max 10d8). Reverse Arrows: As protection from arrows, but negated arrows turn back upon their source.  Sign of SealingM: Magical sigil protects door or chest, deals 1d4/level damage (max 10d4) if opened. Conj Acid Breath: Cone of acid deals 1d6 damage/level (max 10d6). Bands of Steel: Metallic bands immobilize or entangle subject for 1 round/level. Contagious Fog: 20-ft.-radius cloud of fog inﬂicts disease. Corpse Candle: Ghostly hand and candle sheds light, affects incorporeal creatures. IcelanceF: Changes ice into lance, which attacks subject for 6d6 damage and stuns for 1d4 rounds. Mage Armor, Greater: Gives subject +6 armor bonus. Mage Armor, Mass: As mage armor, but one creature/level. Nauseating Breath: Exhale a cone of nauseating gas. Regal Procession: As mount, but you summon several mounts. Servant Horde: Create 2d6 unseen servants +1/ level (max +15). Summon Undead III: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Vipergout: You spit forth celestial or ﬁendish vipers that attack your foes. Analyze Portal: Find a nearby portal and discover Div its properties. Circle Dance: Indicates direction to known individual. Telepathic Bond, Lesser: Link with subject within 30 ft. for 10 minutes/level. Unluck: Subject remakes all rolls, uses worse result for 1 round/level. Ench Mesmerizing Glare: Your gaze fascinates creatures. Miser’s Envy: Subject jealously covets nearby object. Ray of Dizziness: Subject can take only move or standard actions. Suppress Breath Weapon: Subject can’t use its breath weapon. Evoc Blacklight: Create an area of total darkness. Blade of Pain and Fear: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Capricious Zephyr: Gale-force winds push creatures. Chain Missile: Multiple missiles deal 1d4+1 damage each, then strike secondary targets. Flashburst: Flash of light dazzles and blinds creatures in area. Glowing OrbF: Creates permanent magical light; you control brightness. Great Thunderclap: Loud noise causes stunning, deafness, and knocks prone in a large area. Hailstones: Frigid globes deal 5d6 cold damage. Light of Venya: You radiate pearly light, which you can expend as 2 bolts that deal 2d6 damage, 4d6 against undead and evil outsiders.  SPELL LISTS  Diamondsteel M: Metal armor provides damage reduction. Dolorous Blow: Weapon’s threat range is doubled and threats are automatically conﬁrmed. Dragonskin: You gain a bonus to natural armor plus energy resistance 10. False Gravity: Travel on a solid surface as if that surface had its own gravity. Giant’s Wrath: Pebbles you throw become boulders. Girallon’s Blessing: Subject gains one additional pair of arms. Hamatula Barbs: Subjects grow barbs, which damage foes that attack subject in melee. Primal Form: You change into elemental, gain some abilities. Repair Serious Damage: Repairs 3d8 damage +1/ level (max +15) to any construct. Rust Ray: Metal objects take 2d6 damage +1/2 levels. Shadow Phase: Subject becomes partially incorporeal. Snake’s Swiftness, Mass: Allies each immediately make one attack. Spell Vulnerability: Reduce creature’s spell resistance by 1/caster level (max reduction 15). Spiderskin: Subject gains increasing bonus to natural armor, saves against poison, and Hide checks. Steeldance: Blades hover around you and attack foes. Stony Grasp: Arm made of soil and rock grapples foes. Tremorsense: Grants tremorsense to a range of 30 feet. Weapon of Energy: Weapon deals extra energy damage. Weapon of Impact: As keen edge, but aids bludgeoning weapons. Univ Enhance Familiar: Your familiar receives +2 bonus on saves, combat rolls, and AC for 1 hour/level. Fortify Familiar: Your familiar gains 2d8 temporary hp, +2 to armor, 25% chance to avoid extra sneak attack and critical hit damage.  CHAPTER 2  Manyjaws: One set of jaws/level attacks enemies for 1d6 damage. Rainbow BlastF: Line deals 1d6 damage of each energy type. Resonating Bolt: Sonic energy deals 1d4 damage/ level (max 10d4). Scintillating Sphere: 20-ft.-radius burst deals 1d6 electricity/level. Shatterﬂoor: Deals 1d4 sonic/level plus damages ﬂoor surface. Sonorous Hum: Removes need to concentrate to maintain next spell cast. Sound Lance: Sonic energy deals 1d8/level damage. Wall of Light: Creates wall of light, can dazzle creatures. Illus Claws of Darkness: Claws deal 1d8 cold damage and have reach. Cone of Dimness: Subjects believe they are engulfed in magical darkness. Shadow Binding: Ribbonlike shadows entangle creatures in 10-ft.-radius burst. Shadow Cache: You open a small portal to the Plane of Shadow through which you can put an item for later retrieval. Spectral Weapon: Use quasi-real weapon to make touch attacks. Suspended SilenceM: Object becomes programmed to create an area of silence at your command. Necro Curse of Impending Blades, Mass: Enemies take –2 penalty to AC. Disrupt Undead, Greater: As disrupt undead, but 1d8 damage/level. Healing Touch: Heal subject 1d6/2 levels, but take damage equal to half. Incorporeal Enhancement: Grant bonuses to incorporeal undead. Junglerazer: Fey, vermin, plants, and animals take 1d10 damage/level. Mind Poison: Your poisonous touch deals Wis damage. Skull Watch: Skull shrieks when creature enters warded area. Spider Poison: Touch deals 1d6 Str damage, repeats in 1 minute. Undead Lieutenant: Chosen undead can give orders to undead in your control. Undead Torch: Undead creature gains blue aura that gives +2d6 damage against living creatures. Trans Air Breathing: Subjects can breathe air freely. Amorphous Form: Subject becomes puddlelike and can slip through cracks quickly. Bite of the Wererat: You gain the Dexterity and attacks of a wererat. Deeper Darkvision: Subject can see 90 ft. in magical darkness. Demon Dirge: Demons are stunned and take 3d6 damage/round for 1d4 rounds. Devil Blight: Damage and stun baatezu; damage other lawful and evil creatures.  4TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Dispelling Screen: Targeted dispel magic on any creatures and unattended items, +10 max on caster level check. Forceward: Creates a sphere of force that protects against force effects and keeps out incorporeal creatures. Portal Alarm, Improved: Warded portal alerts you or a creature designated by you to creatures passing through it. Ray Deﬂection: Ray attacks are reﬂected away. Ray of Deanimation: Ray deals 1d6 damage/level to constructs.  265  Illus. by J. Nelson  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  266  Resistance, Greater: Subject gains +3 on saving throws. Resist Energy, Mass: Creatures ignore damage from speciﬁed energy type. Wall of Chaos/Evil/Good/LawM: Wall blocks creatures of opposite alignment. Conj Blast of Flame: 60-ft. cone of ﬁre (1d6/level damage). Bloodstar F: Hovering construct does Con damage each time foe is damaged. Ethereal Mount: You conjure swift mounts on the Ethereal Plane. Orb of Acid: Ranged touch, 1d6/level acid damage and subject might be sickened. Orb of Cold: Ranged touch, 1d6/level cold damage and subject might be blinded. Orb of Electricity: Ranged touch, 1d6/level electricity damage and subject might be entangled. Orb of Fire: Ranged touch, 1d6/level ﬁre damage and subject might be dazed. Orb of Force: Globe of force deals 1d6/level damage (max 10d6). Orb of Sound: Ranged touch, 1d4/level sonic damage and subject might be deafened. Summon Undead IV: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Translocation Trick: You and subject switch places and appear as each other. Wall of Sand: Swirling sand blocks ranged attacks, slows movement through. Wall of Water: Creates shapeable transparent wall of water. Assay Spell Resistance: +10 bonus on caster level Div checks to defeat one creature’s spell resistance. Know Vulnerabilities: Determine subject’s vulnerabilities and resistances. Treasure Scent: You detect valuable metals and gems. Ench Battle Hymn: Allies can reroll one Will save/ round. Rebuke, Greater: Subject cowers for 1d4 rounds. Evoc Blistering Radiance: Light dazzles creatures, deals 2d6 ﬁre damage in 50-ft.-radius spread. Defenestrating SphereF: Cloudy gray sphere knocks enemies prone, hurls them upward for subsequent falling damage. Dragon Breath: You choose a dragon type and mimic its breath weapon. Energy Spheres: Five colored spheres attack with or negate acid, cold, electricity, ﬁre, and sonic energy. Explosive Cascade: Bouncing ﬂame ball deals 1d6/level ﬁre damage. Floating Disk, Greater: As ﬂoating disk, but you can ride it. Force Chest: 2-ft-cube chest made of force. Force Claw: Claw of force guards an area, making opportunity attacks. Force Missiles: Unerring missiles of force strike for 2d6 damage and explode in a burst. Forcewave: Bull rushes all creatures within 10 ft.  Stone Sphere: 3-ft.-diameter stone sphere rolls over your enemies. Sword of Deception: Blade of energy attacks independently, deals 1d4 damage, penalizes subsequent save. Thunderlance: Lance of force deals 3d6 damage and might dispel force effects. Vortex of Teeth: 3d8 points of damage due to force per round to all creatures in the area. Wingbind: A net of force entangles the subject, causing it to fall from the sky. Illus Sensory Deprivation: All of subject’s senses are blocked. Shadow Well: Subject enters gloomy pocket plane and emerges frightened. Necro Burning Blood: Subject takes 1d8 acid damage plus 1d8 ﬁre damage/round. Rebuking Breath: Your breath weapon rebukes undead. Trans Attune Form: Grant creature temporary protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Backlash: Subject takes damage if it uses spells against another creature. Bite of the Werewolf: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werewolf. Blinding Breath: Your breath weapon blinds subjects.  Wingbind swiftly brings low-ﬂying foes to ground  Abjur Anticold Sphere: Sphere hedges out cold creatures and protects you from cold. Contingent Energy Resistance: Energy damage triggers a resist energy spell. Dispelling Breath: Your breath weapon acts as a targeted dispel magic to all creatures in its area. Duelward: +4 on Spellcraft checks, counterspell as an immediate action. Ironguard, Lesser: Subject becomes immune to nonmagical metal. Indomitability: Subject can’t be reduced below 1 hp. Planar Tolerance: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. Reciprocal Gyre: Creature or object takes 1d12 damage/level of spell affecting it (max 25d12). Refusal: Spellcasters and creatures with spell-like abilities are prevented from entering an area. Symbol of Spell Loss: Triggered rune absorbs spells yet to be cast. Wall of Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall becomes subjects of targeted dispel magic.  SPELL LISTS  5TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Zone of Respite: Prevents teleportation and similar effects from functioning in the area. Conj Acid Sheath F: Sheath of acid damages those who attack you, enhances acid spells. Arc of Lightning: Line of electricity arcs between two creatures (1d6/level damage). Call ZelekhutX: A zelekhut performs one duty for you. Dimension Door, Greater: Short-range, multipleuse dimension door. Dragon Ally, Lesser X: Exchange services with a 9 HD dragon. Hidden Lodge: Creates sturdy cottage camouﬂaged to blend into natural surroundings. Phantasmal Thief: Creates an unseen force that steals from others. Summon Undead V: Summons undead to ﬁght for you. Viscid Glob: Ranged touch attack hurls 5-ft.diameter glob of glue at subject. Vitriolic Sphere: Potent acid deals 6d6 acid damage plus possible damage in following 2 rounds. Evoc Ball Lightning: Energy ball deals 1d6/level electricity damage. Cacophonic Burst: Noise deals 1d6/level sonic damage to all within area. Cacophonic Shield: Shield 10 ft. from you blocks sounds, deals 1d6 sonic damage +1/level, and deafens creatures passing through. Cyclonic Blast: Deals 1d6 damage/level, knocks down creatures. Fire Shield, Mass: Creatures attacking allies take damage; allies are protected from ﬁre or cold. FirebrandM: One 5-ft. burst/level deals 1d6 ﬁre/ level plus burning for 1 round. Fireburst, Greater: Subjects within 15 ft. take 1d10/level ﬁre damage. Moonbow: Three motes of electricity each deal 1d6/2 levels electricity damage to subjects. Prismatic Ray: Ray of light blinds subject, deals random effect. Shard Storm: Blast deals 3d6 damage to creatures in area. Shroud of Flame: Subject bursts into ﬂames, taking 2d6 ﬁre damage/round. Sonic RumbleF: Cone of sound deals damage. Wall of Limbs: Whirling limbs deal 5d6 damage and grab creatures passing through. Illus Illusory Feast: Subjects become dazed by illusory food. Shadow Form: Gain +4 on Hide, Move Silently, and Escape Artist checks, and concealment; you can move through obstacles if you have ranks in Escape Artist. Shadow Hand: Medium hand blocks opponents or carries items. Shadowfade: Opens a portal to the Plane of Shadow. Necro Death Throes: Your body explodes when you die. Graymantle: Inhibits creature’s ability to heal and regenerate for 1 round/level.  CHAPTER 2  Corporeal Instability: Transform a creature into an amorphous mass. Darkvision, Mass: As darkvision, but affects one/ level subjects. Displacer Form: You change into displacer beast, gain some abilities. Entangling Staff: Quarterstaff can grapple and constrict foes. Fire Stride: Teleport from one ﬁre to another. Flame Whips: Your forelimbs deal 6d6 ﬁre damage. Flight of the Dragon: You grow dragon wings. Iron Bones: Corporeal undead gains +6 natural armor bonus. Metal Melt: Melts metal object without heat. Perinarch: Gain greater control over Limbo’s morphic essence. Raise from the Deep: Creature or sunken ship made buoyant. Repair Critical Damage: Repairs 4d8 damage +1/ level (max +20) to any construct. Ruin Delver’s Fortune: Cast on another creature’s turn and choose one of several beneﬁts. Scramble Portal: You randomize the destination of a magic portal. Sharptooth: One of your natural weapons deals damage as if you were one size larger. Spell Enhancer: Lets you cast another spell in the same round at +2 caster level. Voice of the Dragon: +10 on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate checks; can use one suggestion. Wings of Air, Greater: Subject’s ﬂight maneuverability improves by two steps.  267  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Miasma of Entropy: Rot all natural materials in 30-ft. cone-shaped burst. Night’s Caress: Touched foe takes 1d6 points of damage/level plus 1d6+2 Con damage. Spiritwall: Wall of spirit-forms causes panic, deals 1d10 damage if touched, can bestow negative levels if passed through. Wrack: Renders creature helpless with pain. Trans Bite of the Wereboar: You gain the Strength and attacks of a wereboar. Blink, Greater: Controlled blinking between the Material and Ethereal Planes grants defenses for 1 round/level. Breath Weapon Substitution: Your breath weapon deals a different kind of damage than normal. Draconic Might: Gain +5 to Str, Con, Cha; +4 natural armor; immunity to magic sleep and paralysis effects. Draconic Polymorph: As polymorph, but improved. Dragonsight: Gain low-light vision, darkvision, and blindsense. Earth Reaver: Eruption deals 7d6 damage to all in area. Enlarge Person, Greater: Subject remains enlarged for 1 hour/level. Ethereal Breath: Your breath weapon manifests on the Ethereal Plane. Fiendform: Assume form and abilities of ﬁendish creature, demon, or devil. Fly, Mass: One creature/level ﬂies at speed of 60 ft. Gutsnake: 10-ft. tentacle grows from your stomach and attacks your enemies. Lucent Lance: Ambient light forms lance, deals various damage. Nightstalker’s Transformation M: Gain +4 Dex, +3 luck bonus to AC, +5 luck bonus on Ref saves, +3d6 sneak attack, and evasion. Reduce Person, Greater: Subject remains reduced for 10 minutes/level. Spell Matrix, Lesser F: Magical matrix stores a 3rd-level or lower spell to be cast later as quickened spell. Stunning Breath: Your breath weapon also stuns creatures for 1 round. Surefooted Stride, Mass: As surefooted stride but multiple subjects. Vulnerability: Reduces an opponent’s damage reduction. Xorn Movement: Touched creature swims through earth like a xorn.  6TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  268  Abjur Anticipate Teleportation, Greater F: Predict and delay the arrival of creatures teleporting into range by 3 rounds. Aura of Evasion M: All within 10 ft. gain evasion against breath weapons.  Ruby Ray of ReversalF: Ray negates magical or mundane hazards. Seal Portal M: Seal an interplanar portal or gate. Sign of Sealing, Greater M: Magical sigil protects door, chest, or open space, deals 1d6/level damage (max 20d6) if opened. Conj Resistance, Superior: Subject gains +6 on saving throws. Transcribe Symbol: Safely moves an untriggered magical symbol to another location. Tunnel Swallow: Tunnel’s peristaltic convulsions deal 1d6 points of damage/level (max 15d6). Wall of Gears: Creates wall of moving gears that deals 1d6 damage/2 levels to creatures within 10 ft. Probe Thoughts: Read subject’s memories, one Div question/round. Interplanar Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate across planes. Conj Acid Storm M: Deals 1d6/level acid damage (max 15d6) in a 20-ft. radius. Fire Spiders: Swarm of Fine ﬁre elementals deals ﬁre damage in an area. Freezing Fog: Fog slows creatures, obscures vision, hinders movement. GemjumpF: Teleport to the location of a specially prepared gem. Evoc Fires of Purity: Subject bursts into magical ﬂame, becoming a dangerous weapon. Howling Chain F: Chain of force trips and attacks opponents. Ray of Light: Ray blinds subject. Illus Dream Casting: Alter subject’s dreams to produce desired effect. Illusory Pit: Creatures in area are knocked prone while believing they’re falling. Reﬂective Disguise, Mass: Viewers see subjects as their own species and gender. Shadowy Grappler: Illusory force grapples subject. Necro Aura of Terror: You gain an aura of fear, or your frightful presence becomes more effective. Contagion, Mass: As contagion, but 20-ft. radius. Fleshshiver: Subject is stunned for 1 round, takes 1d6/level damage, and is nauseated for 1d4+2 rounds. Ghoul Gauntlet: Convert victim to a ghoul under your control. Imperious Glare: You cause subjects to cower in fear. Incorporeal Nova: Destroy incorporeal undead. Opalescent Glare: Kill creatures with a look, or make them very afraid. Ray of Entropy: Subject takes –4 Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution. Revive Undead M: Restores undeath to undead that was destroyed up to 1 day/level ago. Spectral Touch: Your touch bestows one negative level/round. Trans Bite of the Weretiger: You gain the Strength and attacks of a weretiger.  Illus. by W. England  Abjur Antimagic RayM: Subject loses all magical powers. Dispelling Screen, Greater: Targeted dispel magic on any creatures and unattended items, +20 max on caster level check. Energy Immunity: Subject and equipment gain immunity to damage of speciﬁed energy type. Ghost Trap: Incorporeal creatures turn corporeal. Hide from Dragons: Dragons can’t perceive one subject/2 levels. IronguardF: Subject becomes immune to all metal. Planar Bubble: Create bubble around creature that emulates its native planar environment. Conj Call KolyarutX: A kolyarut performs one duty for you. Dragon AllyX: As lesser dragon ally, but up to 15 HD. Stun Ray: Subject stunned 1d4+1 rounds. Ench Hiss of Sleep: You induce comatose slumber in subjects. Rebuke, Final: As rebuke, except the subject must save or die. Symphonic NightmareM: Discordant noise haunts subject’s sleep. Transﬁx: Humanoids freeze in place until condition you specify is met. Evoc Emerald Flame Fist: Touch attack deals 3d6 + ﬁre damage 1/level (max +20); subject can be engulfed by ﬂame for additional damage. Ice Claw: Claw of ice grapples and deals cold damage. Prismatic Eye: Orb produces individual prismatic rays as touch attacks. Radiant Assault: 1d6 damage/level, victims dazed or dazzled. Submerge Ship: You control ship mentally while it travels underwater. Illus Solipsism: Subject believes it alone exists. Necro Arrow of BoneM: Missile or thrown weapon gains +4 bonus, subject takes 3d6 damage +1/level (max +20) or is slain. Avasculate: Reduce foe to half hp and stun.  SPELL LISTS  7TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELL  Awaken Undead X: Grant sentience to otherwise mindless undead. Barghest’s FeastM: Destroy corpse, potentially preventing its return to life. Energy Ebb: Give subject one negative level/round for 1 round/level. Evil Glare: Paralyze creatures with your glare. Kiss of the VampireM: You gain vampirelike supernatural abilities, but are vulnerable to attacks that harm undead. Sword of Darkness: Blade of negative energy bestows one or more negative levels. Trans Animate Breath: Your breath weapon becomes an elemental. Bite of the Werebear: You gain the Strength and attacks of a werebear. Body of War: You change into warforged titan, gain some abilities. Brilliant Aura: Allies’ weapons become brilliant energy, ignoring armor. Elemental Body: You take on the qualities of a type of elemental.  CHAPTER 2  Univ  Brilliant Blade: Weapon or projectiles shed light, ignore armor. Cloak of the Sea: Gain blur, freedom of movement, and water breathing while in water. Extract Water Elemental: Pulls water from victim, forms water elemental. HardeningM: Increases object’s hardness by 1 point/2 levels. Make Manifest: You cause a creature on a coexistent plane to appear on your plane. Ooze Puppet: You telekinetically control an ooze. Stone Body: Your body becomes living stone. Subvert Planar Essence: Reduces subject’s damage reduction and spell resistance. Imbue Familiar with Spell Ability: You transfer spells and casting ability into your familiar.  Wizards study spells from many sources in preparation for a journey  269  SPELL LISTS  CHAPTER 2  Energy Transformation FieldMX: Area absorbs magic energy to power a predetermined spell. Glass Strike: Turns subject into glass. Spell Matrix F: Stores up to two spells of 3rd level or lower to be released later. Stone Shape, Greater: Sculpts 10 cu. ft. + 10 cu. ft./level of stone into any shape. Synostodweomer: Channel a spell into positive energy to cure 1d8/spell level.  270  8TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Spell EngineMX: Wizard only. Swap out prepared spells for other spells in your spellbook. Wall of Greater Dispel Magic: Creatures passing through a transparent wall become subjects of targeted greater dispel magic. Conj Fierce Pride of the Beastlands: Summon celestial lions and celestial dire lions to follow your commands. Plane Shift, Greater: Plane shift accurately to your desired destination. Ench Maddening Whispers: You induce confusion and madness in subjects. Wrathful Castigation: Subject dies or is dazed and –4 on saves for 1 round/level. Evoc Field of Icy RazorsF: Creatures in area take normal and cold damage, might be slowed. Lightning Ring: Ring of lightning gives you resistance to electricity 20, damages adjacent creatures, and emits two lightning bolts per round. Illus Shifting Paths: Illusion hides path, creates false new path. Invisibility, Superior: Subject is invisible to sight, hearing, and scent for 1 minute/level, and can attack. Necro Avascular Mass: Reduce foe to half hp and stun, entangle in 20-ft. radius from victim. Bestow Curse, Greater: As bestow curse, but more severe penalties. Blackﬁre: Subject is engulfed in black ﬂame, takes 1d4 Con damage and becomes nauseated; ﬂames and effects can spread to adjacent living creatures. Heart of StoneFX: Exchange your heart with stone heart to gain damage reduction, resistance to energy for 1 year. Skeletal Guard M: Create one skeleton/level with turn resistance. Veil of Undeath: You gain undead traits. Trans Excavate: Creates a permanent passage in earth and walls. Flensing: Pain and trauma deal 2d6 damage, 1d6 Con damage, 1d6 Cha damage for up to 4 rounds. Ghostform: You assume incorporeal form and gain some incorporeal traits and bonuses. Make Manifest, Mass: As make manifest but affecting all creatures in the area. Stunning Breath, Greater: Your breath weapon also stuns creatures for 2d4 rounds.  9TH-LEVEL SORCERER/WIZARD SPELLS  Abjur Absorption: You absorb spell energy to power spells of your own. Effulgent Epuration: Creates one sphere/level to negate hostile magic. Magic Miasma: Solid fog reduces caster level by –4. Maw of Chaos: Chaotic energy dazes, deals damage, impedes concentration. Reaving Dispel: On a targeted dispel, steal spell power and effects for yourself. Unbinding: Frees everyone in range from spells that constrain or bind. Conj Abyssal Army: Summons demons to ﬁght for you. Black Blade of Disaster: Floating magic weapon disintegrates subjects. Call MarutX: A marut performs one duty for you. Dragon Ally, Greater X: As lesser dragon ally, but up to 21 HD. Heavenly Host: Summons archons to ﬁght for you. Hellish Horde: Summons devils to ﬁght for you. Obedient Avalanche: Snowy avalanche crushes and buries your foes. Sphere of Ultimate Destruction: Featureless black sphere does 2d6/level damage, disintegrates. Summon Elemental Monolith M: Calls powerful elemental creature to ﬁght for you. Vile Death MX: Undead creature gains ﬁendish template. Eye of Power: As arcane eye, but you can cast spells of 3rd level or lower through it. HindsightM: You see into the past. Div Ench Programmed AmnesiaM: Destroy, alter, or replace memories in subject creature. Evoc Instant RefugeMX: Transport to a safe location of your choice. Reality Maelstrom: Hole in reality sends creatures and objects to another plane. Necro Enervating Breath: Your breath weapon also bestows 2d4 negative levels. Plague of Undead M: Animates horde of undead. Trans Awaken ConstructX: Construct gains humanlike sentience. Breath Weapon Admixture: Add a second kind of energy to your breath weapon. Perinarch, Planar: Gain control over a small area of any divinely morphic plane. Replicate Casting: Duplicate observed spell or spell-like ability. Spell Matrix, Greater F: Stores up to three spells of 3rd level or lower to be released later. Transmute Rock to Lava: Transforms one 10-ft. cube with subsequent ﬁre damage and effects. Undermaster M: You gain earth-related spell-like abilities.  Appendix: Domain Spells  The following domains supplement those described in Chapter 11 of the Player’s Handbook. In the lists that follow, a dagger (†) following a spell name signiﬁes a spell described in this book.  6 Wind Walk: You and your allies turn vaporous and travel fast. 7 Cat’s Grace, Mass: As cat’s grace, one subject/level. 8 Blink, Greater†: Controlled blinking between the Material and Ethereal Planes grants defenses for 1 round/level. 9 Time Stop: You act freely for 1d4+1 rounds.  CHARM DOMAIN  Balance Domain Spells  Charm Domain Spells  Granted Power: Once per day, as a free action, you can add your Wisdom modiﬁer to your Armor Class. This bonus lasts for 1 round per cleric level.  1 Make Whole: Repairs an object. 2 Calm Emotions: Calms creatures, negating emotion effects. 3 Clarity of Mind†: +4 bonus on saves against mindaffecting spells and abilities, allows reroll of concealment miss chance. 4 Dismissal: Forces a creature to return to native plane. 5 Sanctuary, Mass†: One creature/level can’t be attacked, and can’t attack. 6 Banishment: Banishes 2 HD/level of extraplanar creatures. 7 Word of Balance†: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or nauseates nonneutral creatures. 8 Protection from SpellsMF: Confers +8 resistance bonus. 9 Weighed in the Balance†: Harms or heals creatures within 30 feet of you.  CAVERN DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain the stonecunning ability (PH 15). If you already have stonecunning, your racial bonus on checks to notice unusual stonework increases to +4.  Cavern Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Detect Secret Doors: Reveals hidden doors within 60 ft. Darkness: 20-ft. radius of supernatural shadow. Meld into Stone: You and your gear merge with stone. Leomund’s Secure Shelter: Creates sturdy cottage. Passwall: Creates passage through wood or stone wall. Find the Path: Shows most direct way to a location. Maw of Stone†: Animates cavern opening or chamber. Earthquake: Intense tremor shakes 5-ft./level radius. Imprisonment: Entombs subject beneath the earth.  CELERITY DOMAIN  Granted Power: Your land speed is faster than the norm for your race by 10 feet. This beneﬁt is lost if you are wearing medium or heavy armor or carrying a medium or heavy load.  Celerity Domain Spells 1 2 3 4  Expeditious Retreat: Your speed increases by 30 ft. Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 minute/level. Blur: Attacks miss subject 20% of the time. Haste: One creature/level moves faster, +1 on attack rolls, AC, and Reﬂex saves. 5 Tree Stride: Step from one tree to another far away.  Granted Power: You can boost your Charisma by 4 points once per day. Activating this power is a free action. The Charisma increase lasts 1 minute.  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 2 Calm Emotions: Calms creatures, negating emotion effects. 3 Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 4 Good Hope: Subjects gain +2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. 5 Charm Monster: Makes monster believe it is your ally. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 8 Demand: As sending, plus you can send suggestion. 9 Dominate Monster: As dominate person, but any creature.  APPENDIX  BALANCE DOMAIN  COLD DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You can turn or destroy ﬁre creatures as a good cleric turns undead. You can also rebuke or command cold creatures as an evil cleric rebukes undead. Use these abilities a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  Cold Domain Spells  1 Chill Touch: One touch/level deals 1d6 damage and possibly 1 Str damage. 2 Chill Metal: Cold metal damages those who touch it. 3 Sleet Storm: Hampers vision and movement. 4 Ice Storm: Hail deals 5d6 damage in cylinder 40 ft. across. 5 Wall of Ice: Ice plane creates wall with 15 hp +1/level, or hemisphere can trap creatures inside. 6 Cone of Cold: 1d6/level cold damage. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. 8 Polar Ray: Ranged touch attack deals 1d6/level cold damage. 9 Obedient Avalanche†: Snowy avalanche crushes and buries your foes.  COMMUNITY DOMAIN  Granted Power: Use calm emotions as a spell-like ability once per day. Gain a +2 bonus on Diplomacy checks.  Community Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6  Bless: Allies gain +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. Status: Monitors condition, position of allies. Prayer: Allies +1 on most rolls, enemies –1 penalty. Tongues: Speak any language. Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses.  271  7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 Mordenkainen’s Magniﬁcent Mansion F: Door leads to extradimensional mansion. 9 Heal, Mass: As heal, but with several subjects.  COMPETITION DOMAIN  APPENDIX  Granted Power (Ex): You gain a +1 bonus on opposed checks you make.  Competition Domain Spells  1 Remove Fear: Suppresses fear or gives +4 on saves against fear for one subject + one per 4 levels. 2 Zeal†: You move through foes to attack the enemy you want. 3 Prayer: Allies +1 bonus on most rolls, enemies –1 penalty. 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Str, and 1 hp/ level. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases, and you gain combat bonuses. 6 Zealot Pact†X: You automatically gain combat bonuses when you attack someone of opposite alignment. 7 Regenerate: Subject’s severed limbs grow back, cures 4d8 damage +1/level (max +35). 8 Moment of Prescience: You gain insight bonus on single attack roll, check, or save. 9 Visage of the Deity, Greater†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish.  COURAGE DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You radiate an aura of courage that grants all allies within 10 feet (including yourself) a +4 morale bonus on saving throws against fear effects. This ability functions only while you are conscious.  Courage Domain Spells  1 Remove Fear: Suppresses fear or gives +4 on saves against fear for one subject + one per 4 levels. 2 Aid: +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear, 1d8 temporary hp +1/level (max +10). 3 Cloak of Bravery: You and your allies gain a bonus on saves against fear. 4 Heroism: Gives +2 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. 5 Valiant Fury†: +4 Str, Con; +2 Will saves, extra attack. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Heroism, Greater: Gives +4 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks; immunity to fear; temporary hp. 8 Lion’s Roar†: Deals 1d8 points of damage/2 levels to enemies; allies get +1 on attacks and saves against fear, temporary hp. 9 Cloak of Bravery, Greater†: You and your allies become immune to fear and get +2 bonus on attacks.  CRAFT DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast conjuration (creation) spells at +1 caster level and gain Skill Focus as a bonus feat for one Craft skill of your choice.  272  Craft Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6  Animate Rope: Makes a rope move at your command. Wood Shape: Rearranges wooden objects to suit you. Stone Shape: Sculpts stone into any shape. Minor Creation: Creates one cloth or wood object. Wall of Stone: Creates a stone wall that can be shaped. Fantastic Machine†: Creates a machine to perform a single simple task. 7 Major Creation: As minor creation, plus stone and metal. 8 ForcecageM: Cube or cage of force imprisons all inside. 9 Fantastic Machine, Greater† Creates a machine to perform multiple tasks.  CREATION DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast conjuration (creation) spells at +1 caster level.  Creation Domain Spells  1 Create Water: Creates 2 gallons/level of pure water. 2 Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. 3 Create Food and Water: Feeds three humans (or one horse)/level. 4 Minor Creation: Creates one cloth or wood object. 5 Major Creation: As minor creation, plus stone and metal. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Permanent ImageM: Includes sight, sound, and smell. 8 True Creation†X: As major creation, but permanent. 9 Pavilion of Grandeur†: A feast and a great pavilion are created.  DARKNESS DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Blind-Fight as a bonus feat.  Darkness Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Obscuring Mist: Fog surrounds you. Blindness/Deafness: Makes subject blinded or deafened. Blacklight† Create an area of total darkness. Armor of Darkness†: Shroud grants deﬂection bonus, darkvision, and other effects. Darkbolt†: Multiple bolts deal 2d8 damage and daze creatures. Prying Eyes: 1d4 +1/level ﬂoating eyes scout for you. Nightmare: Sends vision dealing 1d10 damage, fatigue. Power Word Blind: Blinds creature with 200 hp or less. Power Word Kill: Kills one creature with 100 hp or less.  DEATHBOUND DOMAIN  Granted Power: Your limit for creating undead animated with spells increases to three times your caster level instead of the normal two times caster level.  Deathbound Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5  Chill of the Grave†: Ray causes cold damage. Blade of Pain and Fear†: Creates blade of gnashing teeth. Fangs of the Vampire King†: Grow vampire fangs. Wither Limb†: Cause enemy’s limbs to wither. Revive Undead†M: Restores undeath to undead that was destroyed up to 1 day/level ago. 6 Awaken Undead†X: Grant sentience to otherwise mindless undead.  7 Avasculate†: Reduce foe to half hp and stun. 8 Avascular Mass†: Reduce foe to half hp and stun, entangle in 20-ft. radius from victim. 9 Wail of the Banshee: Kills one creature/level.  DOMINATION DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Spell Focus (enchantment) as a bonus feat.  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 3 Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 4 Dominate Person: Controls humanoid telepathically. 5 Command, Greater: As command, but affects one subject/ level. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Suggestion, Mass: As suggestion, plus one subject/level. 8 True Domination†: As dominate person, but save at –4. 9 Monstrous Thrall†: As true domination, but permanent and affects any creature.  DRAGON DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add Bluff and Intimidate to your list of cleric class skills.  Dragon Domain Spells  1 Magic Fang: One natural weapon of subject creature gets +1 on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Resist Energy: Ignores 10 (or more) points of damage/ attack from speciﬁed energy type. 3 Magic Fang, Greater: One natural weapon of subject creature gets +1/4 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls (max +5). 4 Voice of the Dragon†: +10 on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Intimidate checks; can use one suggestion. 5 True SeeingM: Lets you see all things as they really are. 6 Stoneskin M: Ignore 10 points of damage per attack. 7 Dragon Ally†X: As lesser dragon ally, but up to 15 HD. 8 Suggestion, Mass: As suggestion, plus one subject/level. 9 Dominate Monster: As dominate person, but any creature.  DREAM DOMAIN  Granted Power: You are immune to fear effects.  Dream Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Sleep: Puts 4 HD of creatures into magical slumber. AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. Deep Slumber: Puts 10 HD of creatures to sleep. Phantasmal Killer: Fearsome illusion kills subject or deals 3d6 damage. Nightmare: Sends vision dealing 1d10 damage, fatigue. Dream Sight†: Your spirit can hear and see at a distance for 1 minute/level. Scrying, GreaterF: As scrying, but faster and longer. Power Word Stun: Stuns creature with 150 hp or less. Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  Granted Power: You gain Lightning Reﬂexes as a bonus feat.  Drow Domain Spells  1 Cloak of Dark Power†: Cloak protects subject from effects of sunlight. 2 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: See or hear at a distance for 1 minute/level. 3 Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 5 Spiderform†: Polymorph into drider or Large spider. 6 Dispelling Screen, Greater†: Targeted dispel magic on any creatures and unattended items, +20 max on caster level check. 7 Word of Chaos: Nonchaotic subject is killed, confused, stunned, or deafened. 8 Planar Ally, Greater: As lesser planar ally, but up to 24 HD. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  APPENDIX  Domination Domain Spells  DROW DOMAIN  DWARF DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Great Fortitude as a bonus feat.  Dwarf Domain Spells  1 Magic Weapon: Weapon gains +1 bonus. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. 3 Glyph of WardingM: Inscription harms those who pass it. 4 Magic Weapon, Greater: +1 bonus/4 levels (max +5). 5 Fabricate: Transforms raw material into ﬁnished items. 6 Stone Tell: Talk to natural or worked stone. 7 Dictum: Kills, paralyzes, slows, or deafens nonlawful subjects. 8 Protection from SpellsMF: Confers +8 resistance bonus. 9 Elemental Swarm: Summons multiple elementals.* *Earth spell only.  ELF DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain the Point Blank Shot feat.  Elf Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  True Strike: +20 on your next attack roll. Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 minute/level. Snare: Creates a magic booby trap. Tree Stride: Step from one tree to another far away. Commune with Nature: Learn about terrain for 1 mile/ level. Find the Path: Shows most direct way to a location. Liveoak: Oak becomes treant guardian. Sunburst: Blinds all within 80 ft., deals 6d6 damage. Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures.  ENVY DOMAIN  Granted Powers: Add Bluff to your list of cleric class skills. In addition, you cast spells that damage or drain ability scores or bestow negative levels at +1 caster level.  273  APPENDIX  ENVY DOMAIN SPELLS  Force Domain Spells  FAMILY DOMAIN  GLORY DOMAIN  1 Disguise Self: Changes your appearance. 2 Ray of Enfeeblement: Ray deals 1d6+1/2 levels Str penalty. 3 Touch of Idiocy: Subject takes 1d6-point penalty to Int, Wis, and Cha. 4 Vampiric Touch: Touch deals 1d6/2 levels damage; caster gains damage as hp. 5 Crushing Despair: Subjects take –2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. 6 Magic JarF: Enables possession of another creature. 7 Limited Wish X: Alters reality—within spell limits. 8 Simulacrum MX: Creates partially real double of a creature. 9 Wish X: As limited wish, but with fewer limits.  Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can protect a number of creatures equal to your Charisma modiﬁer (minimum one creature) with a +4 dodge bonus to AC. This ability lasts 1 round per level. An affected creature loses this protection if it moves more than 10 feet from you. You can affect yourself with this ability.  Family Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6  Bless: Allies gain +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. Shield OtherF: You take half of subject’s damage. Helping Hand: Ghostly hand leads subject to you. Imbue with Spell Ability: Transfer spells to subject. Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 Protection from SpellsMF: Confers +8 resistance bonus. 9 Prismatic Sphere: As prismatic wall, but surrounds on all sides.  FATE DOMAIN  Granted Power (Ex): You gain the uncanny dodge ability. If you have another class that gives you uncanny dodge, your cleric levels add to that class’s level for determining when you gain the improved uncanny dodge class feature (PH 26).  Fate Domain Spells  1 True Strike: +20 on your next attack roll. 2 AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. 3 Bestow Curse: –6 to an ability score; –4 on attack rolls, saves, and checks; or 50% chance of losing each action. 4 Status: Monitors condition, position of allies. 5 Mark of Justice: Designates action that will trigger curse on subject. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Vision MX: As legend lore, but quicker and strenuous. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger.  FORCE DOMAIN  274  Granted Power (Su): By manipulating cosmic forces of inertia, once per day you can reroll any damage roll (for a weapon, a spell, or an ability) and take the better of the two rolls.  1 Mage Armor: Gives subject +4 armor bonus. 2 Magic Missile: 1d4+1 damage; +1 missile/2 levels above 1st (max 5). 3 Blast of Force†: Attack deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). 4 Otiluke’s Resilient Sphere: Force globe protects but traps one subject. 5 Wall of Force: Wall is immune to damage. 6 Repulsion: Creatures can’t approach you. 7 ForcecageM: Cube or cage of force imprisons all inside. 8 Otiluke’s Telekinetic Sphere: As Otiluke’s resilient sphere, but you move sphere telekinetically. 9 Bigby’s Crushing Hand: Large hand provides cover, pushes, or crushes your foes.  Granted Power: Turn undead with a +2 bonus on the turning check and +1d6 on the turning damage roll.  Glory Domain Spells  1 Disrupt Undead: Deals 1d6 damage to one undead. 2 Bless Weapon: Weapon strikes true against evil foes. 3 Searing Light: Ray deals 1d8/2 levels damage, more against undead. 4 Holy Smite: Damages and blinds evil creatures. 5 Holy Sword: Weapon becomes +5, deals +2d6 damage against evil. 6 Bolt of Glory†: Positive energy ray deals extra damage to evil outsiders and undead. 7 Sunbeam: Beam blinds and deals 4d6 damage. 8 Crown of Glory†M: You gain +4 Charisma and inspire your allies. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  GLUTTONY DOMAIN  Granted Power: For a total time per day of 1 round per cleric level you possess, you can increase your size as if you were affected by the enlarge person spell. Activating the power or ending it is a free action.  Gluttony Domain Spells  1 Goodberry: 2d4 berries each cure 1 hp (max 8 hit points/24 hours) 2 Death Knell: Kills dying creature; you gain 1d8 temporary hp, +2 to Str, and +1 caster level. 3 Create Food and Water: Feeds three humans (or one horse)/level. 4 Vampiric Touch: Touch deals 1d6/2 levels damage; caster gains damage as hp. 5 Baleful Polymorph: Transforms subject into harmless animal. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Stone to Flesh: Restores petriﬁed creatures. 8 Bite of the King†: Swallow enemies whole. 9 Trap the SoulMF: Imprisons subject within gem.  GNOME DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast illusion spells at +1 caster level.  Gnome Domain Spells  GREED DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a +2 competence bonus on Appraise, Open Lock, and Sleight of Hand checks.  Greed Domain Spells  1 Cheat†: Caster rerolls when determining the success of a game of chance. 2 Entice Gift† Subject gives caster what it’s holding. 3 Knock: Opens locked or magically sealed door. 4 Fire TrapM: Opened object deals 1d4 damage +1/level. 5 Fabricate: Transforms raw material into ﬁnished items. 6 Guards and Wards: Array of magical effects protects area. 7 Teleport Object: As teleport, but affects a touched object. 8 Phantasmal Thief†: Creates an unseen force that steals from others. 9 SympathyF: Object or location attracts certain creatures.  HALFLING DOMAIN  Granted Power: Once per day for 10 minutes, you add your Charisma modiﬁer to your Climb, Jump, Move Silently, and Hide checks. Activating this ability is a free action.  Halfling Domain Spells  1 Magic Stone: Three stones gain +1 on attack rolls, deal 1d6+1 damage. 2 Cat’s Grace: Subject gains +4 to Dex for 1 minute/level. 3 Magic Vestment: Armor or shield gains +1 enhancement/ 4 levels. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 Mordenkainen’s Faithful Hound: Phantom dog can attack, guard. 6 Move Earth: Dig trenches and build walls. 7 Shadow Walk: Step into shadow to travel rapidly. 8 Word of Recall: Teleports you back to designated place. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger.  HATRED DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, choose one opponent. Against that foe you gain a +2 profane bonus on attack rolls, saving throws, and Armor Class for 1 minute.  1 Doom: One subject takes –2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. 2 Scare: Panics creatures of less than 6 HD. 3 Bestow Curse: –6 to an ability score; –4 on attack rolls, saves, and checks; or 50% chance of losing each action. 4 Rage: Gives +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases and you gain combat bonuses. 6 ForbiddanceM: Blocks planar travel, damages creatures of different alignment. 7 Blasphemy: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil subject. 8 Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures. 9 Wail of the Banshee: Kills one creature/level.  APPENDIX  1 Silent Image: Creates minor illusion of your design. 2 Gembomb†M: Gem becomes a bomb that deals 1d8 force damage/2 levels. 3 Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. 4 Minor Creation: Creates one cloth or wood object. 5 Hallucinatory Terrain: Makes one type of terrain appear like another (ﬁeld into forest, or the like). 6 Fantastic Machine: Creates a machine to perform a single simple task. 7 Screen: Illusion hides area from vision, scrying. 8 Otto’s Irresistible Dance: Forces subject to dance. 9 Summon Nature’s Ally IX*: Summons creature to ﬁght. *Earth elementals or animals only.  Hatred Domain Spells  HUNGER DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a bite attack. If you are Small, your bite attack deals 1d4 points of damage; Medium, 1d6; or Large, 1d8. You are proﬁcient with your bite, and considered armed. If you already have a natural bite attack, use the higher of the two damage values. This is considered a secondary natural attack.  Hunger Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Ghoul Light†: Light provides turn resistance. Ghoul Glyph†: Glyph wards area, paralyzes victims. Ghoul Gesture†: Ray paralyzes subject. Enervation: Subject gains 1d4 negative levels. Ghoul Gauntlet†: Convert victim to a ghoul under your control. Eyes of the King† Summon ﬁendish dire bats. Field of Ghouls†: Transform dying creatures into ghouls. Bite of the King†: Swallow enemies whole. Energy Drain: Subject gains 2d4 negative levels.  ILLUSION DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast all illusion spells at +1 caster level.  Illusion Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Silent Image: Creates minor illusion of your design. Minor Image: As silent image, plus some sound. Displacement: Attacks miss subject 50%. Phantasmal Killer: Fearsome illusion kills subject or deals 3d6 damage. Persistent Image: As major image, but no concentration required. Mislead: Turns you invisible and creates illusory double. Project Image: Illusory double can talk and cast spells. Screen: Illusion hides area from vision, scrying. Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  INQUISITION DOMAIN  Granted Power: Gain a +4 bonus on dispel checks.  Inquisition Domain Spells 1 2 3 4  Detect Chaos: Reveals chaotic creatures, spells, or objects. Zone of Truth: Subjects within range cannot lie. Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods.  275  5 True SeeingM: Lets you see all things as they really are. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Dictum: Kills, paralyzes, slows, or deafens nonlawful subjects. 8 Shield of LawF: +4 AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against chaotic spells. 9 Imprisonment: Entombs subject beneath the earth.  APPENDIX  LIBERATION DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): If you are affected by a charm, compulsion, or fear effect and fail your saving throw, you can attempt the save again 1 round later at the same DC. You get only this one extra chance to succeed on your saving throw.  Liberation Domain Spells  1 Omen of Peril†F: You know how dangerous the future will be. 2 Undetectable Alignment: Conceals alignment for 24 hours. 3 Rage: Subjects gain +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 Break Enchantment: Frees subjects from enchantments, alterations, curses, and petriﬁcation. 6 Dispel Magic, Greater: As dispel magic, but up to +20 on check. 7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Unbinding†: Frees everyone in range from spells that constrain or bind.  LUST DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you gain an enhancement bonus to Charisma equal to your cleric level. The power lasts for 1 round.  Lust Domain Spells  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 2 Invisibility: Subject is invisible for 1 minute/level or until it attacks. 3 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: See or hear at a distance for 1 minute/level. 4 Planar Ally, LesserX: Exchange services with a 6 HD extraplanar creature. 5 ScryingF: Spies on subject from a distance. 6 Symbol of Persuasion M: Triggered rune charms nearby creatures. 7 RefugeM: Alters item to transport its possessor to you. 8 SympathyF: Object or location attracts certain creatures. 9 Trap the SoulMF: Imprisons subject within gem.  MADNESS DOMAIN  Granted Power: You subtract 1 from all Wisdom-based skill checks and all Will saves. However, once per day, you can see and act with the clarity of true madness: Add one-half your level to a single Wisdom-based skill check or Will save. You must choose to use this beneﬁt before the check or save is rolled.  276  Madness Domain Spells  1 Confusion, Lesser: One creature acts randomly for 1 round. 2 Touch of Madness†: Dazes one creature for 1 round/level. 3 Rage: Subjects gain +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 4 Confusion: Makes subject behave oddly for 1 round/level. 5 Bolts of Bedevilment†: One ray/round, dazes 1d3 rounds. 6 Phantasmal Killer: Fearsome illusion kills subject or deals 3d6 damage. 7 Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 8 Maddening Scream†: Subject has –4 AC, no shield, Reﬂex save on 20 only. 9 Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  MENTALISM DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): Once per day as a standard action, you can generate a mental ward, granting a creature you touch a resistance bonus on its next Will saving throw equal to your level +2. The mental ward is an abjuration effect with a duration of 1 hour.  Mentalism Domain Spells  1 Confusion, Lesser: One creature acts randomly for 1 round. 2 Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. 3 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: See or hear at a distance for 1 minute/level. 4 Modify Memory: Changes 5 minutes of subject’s memories. 5 Mind Fog: Subjects in fog get –10 to Wisdom and Will checks. 6 Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. 7 Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Astral Projection M: Projects you and companions onto the Astral Plane.  METAL DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Martial Weapon Proﬁciency and Weapon Focus as bonus feats for either the light hammer or the warhammer (your choice).  Metal Domain Spells  1 Magic Weapon: Weapon gains +1 bonus. 2 Heat Metal: Make metal so hot it damages those who touch it. 3 Keen Edge: Doubles normal weapon’s threat range. 4 Rusting Grasp: Your touch corrodes iron and alloys. 5 Wall of Iron M: 30 hp/4 levels; can topple onto foes. 6 Blade Barrier: Wall of blades deals 1d6/level damage. 7 Transmute Metal to Wood: Metal within 40 ft. becomes wood. 8 Iron Body: Your body becomes living iron. 9 Repel Metal or Stone: Pushes away metal and stone.  MIND DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a +2 bonus on Bluff, Diplomacy, and Sense Motive checks.  Mind Domain Spells  MOON DOMAIN  Granted Power: Turn or destroy lycanthropes as a good cleric turns or destroys undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  Moon Domain Spells  1 Faerie Fire: Outlines subject with light, canceling blur, concealment, and the like. 2 Moonbeam†: Forces lycanthropes to regain human shape. 3 Moon Blade†: Creates sword that does 2d8 damage +1/two level, scrambles magic. 4 Fear: Subjects within cone ﬂee for 1 round/level. 5 Moon Path†: Creates invisible stair or bridge. 6 Permanent ImageM: Includes sight, sound, and smell. 7 Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 8 Animal Shapes: One ally/level polymorphs into chosen animal. 9 Moonﬁre†: Cone of light damages creatures, reveals hidden things, negates electricity damage.  MYSTICISM DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day, you can use a free action to channel your deity’s power to grant yourself a luck bonus on your saving throws equal to your Charisma modiﬁer (minimum +1). The effect lasts for 1 round per cleric level.  Mysticism Domain Spells  1 Divine Favor: You gain +1/3 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Spiritual Weapon: Magic weapon attacks on its own. 3 Visage of the Deity, Lesser†: You gain +4 Cha and resistance 10 to certain energy types. 4 Weapon of the Deity†: Your weapon gains enhancement bonus and special ability. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases and you gain combat bonuses. 6 Visage of the Deity†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become celestial or ﬁendish. 7 Blasphemy/Holy Word*: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil/non-good subjects. 8 Holy Aura/Unholy AuraF*: +4 AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against evil/good spells. 9 Visage of the Deity, Greater†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish. * Choose good or evil version based on your alignment.  NOBILITY DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): Once per day as a standard action, you can inspire allies, giving them a +2 morale bonus on saving throws, attack rolls and damage rolls, ability checks, and skill checks. Allies must be able to hear you speak for 1 round. This effect lasts for a number of rounds equal to your Charisma bonus (minimum 1 round).  Nobility Domain Spells  1 Divine Favor: You gain +1/3 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 3 Magic Vestment: Armor or shield gains +1 enhancement/4 levels. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 5 Command, Greater: As command, but affects one subject/ level. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Repulsion: Creatures can’t approach you. 8 Demand: As sending, plus you can send suggestion. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  APPENDIX  1 Comprehend Languages: You understand all spoken and written languages. 2 Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. 3 Telepathic Bond, Lesser: Link with subject within 30 ft. for 10 minutes/level. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 5 Rary’s Telepathic Bond: Link lets allies communicate. 6 Probe Thoughts†: Read subject’s memories, one question/ round. 7 Brain Spider†: Eavesdrop on thoughts of up to eight other creatures. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Weird: As phantasmal killer, but affects all within 30 ft.  OCEAN DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You have the supernatural ability to breathe water as if under the effect of a water breathing spell, for up to 1 minute per level. This effect occurs automatically as soon as it applies, lasts until it runs out or is no longer needed, and can operate multiple times per day (up to the total daily time limit).  Ocean Domain Spells  1 Endure Elements: Exist comfortably in hot or cold environments. 2 Sound Burst: Deals 1d8 sonic damage to subjects, might also stun them. 3 Water Breathing: Subjects can breathe underwater. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 Wall of Ice: Ice plane creates wall with 15 hp +1/level, or hemisphere can trap creatures inside. 6 Otiluke’s Freezing Sphere: Freezes water or deals cold damage. 7 Waterspout†: Waterspout you control picks up and damages foes. 8 Maelstrom†: Water vortex traps and damages creatures and objects. 9 Elemental Swarm: Summons multiple elementals.* *Cast as a water spell only.  ORACLE DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast all divination spells at +2 caster level.  Oracle Domain Spells  1 IdentifyM: Determines properties of magic item. 2 AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. 3 Divination M: Provides useful advice for speciﬁc proposed action. 4 ScryingF: Spies on subject from a distance. 5 CommuneX: Deity answers one yes-or-no question/level.  277  6 Legend LoreMF: Lets you learn tales about a person, place, or thing. 7 Scrying, GreaterF: As scrying, but faster and longer. 8 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger.  APPENDIX  ORC DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): You gain the smite power, the ability to make a single melee attack with a bonus on the damage roll equal to your cleric level (if you hit). You must declare the smite before making the attack. It is usable once per day. If used against a dwarf or an elf, you get a +4 bonus on the smite attack roll.  Orc Domain Spells  1 Cause Fear: One creature of 5 HD or fewer ﬂees for 1d4 rounds. 2 Produce Flame: 1d6 damage +1/level, touch or thrown. 3 Prayer: Allies +1 on most rolls, enemies –1 penalty. 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Str, and 1 hp/ level. 5 Prying Eyes: 1d4 +1/level ﬂoating eyes scout for you. 6 Eyebite: Subject becomes panicked, sickened, and comatose. 7 Blasphemy: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil subject. 8 Cloak of ChaosF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against lawful spells. 9 Power Word Kill: Kills one creature with 100 hp or less.  PACT DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add Appraise, Intimidate, and Sense Motive to your list of cleric class skills.  Pact Domain Spells  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. 2 Shield OtherF: You take half of subject’s damage. 3 Speak With Dead: Corpse answers one question/2 levels. 4 Divination M: Provides useful advice for speciﬁc proposed action. 5 Stalwart Pact†M: You gain combat bonuses automatically when reduced to half hit points or lower. 6 Zealot Pact†X: You automatically gain combat bonuses when you attack someone of opposite alignment. 7 Renewal Pact†M: Creature is automatically healed if adverse condition affects it. 8 Death Pact†M: Deity brings subject back from the dead automatically. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  PESTILENCE DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain immunity to the effects of all diseases, though you can still carry infectious diseases.  Pestilence Domain Spells  278  1 Doom: One subject takes –2 on attacks, damage, saves, and checks. 2 Summon Swarm: Summons swarm of bats, rats, or spiders. 3 Contagion: Infects subject with chosen disease.  4 Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 5 Plague of Rats† Summons horde of rats. 6 Curse of Lycanthropy†: Kills subject and summons wererats. 7 Scourge†: Inﬂicts a disease that must be magically cured, one subject/level. 8 Horrid Wilting: Deals 1d6/level damage within 30 ft. 9 Otyugh Swarm†: Creates 3d4 otyughs or 1d3+1 Huge otyughs.  PLANNING DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Extend Spell as a bonus feat.  Planning Domain Spells  1 Deathwatch: Reveals how near death subjects within 30 ft. are. 2 AuguryMF: Learns whether an action will be good or bad. 3 Clairaudience/Clairvoyance: Hear or see at a distance for 1 minute/level. 4 Status: Monitors condition, position of allies. 5 Detect Scrying: Alerts you of magical eavesdropping. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Scrying, GreaterF: As scrying, but faster and longer. 8 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. 9 Time Stop: You act freely for 1d4+1 rounds.  PORTAL DOMAIN  Granted Power: You can detect an active or inactive portal as if it were a normal secret door (Search DC 20).  Portal Domain Spells  1 Summon Monster I: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 2 Analyze Portal: Find a nearby portal and discover its properties. 3 Dimensional Anchor: Bars extradimensional movement. 4 Dimension Door: Teleports you a short distance. 5 Teleport: Forces a creature to return to native plane. 6 Banishment: Banishes 2 HD/level of extraplanar creatures. 7 Etherealness: Travel to Ethereal Plane with companions. 8 Maze: Traps subject in extradimensional maze. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  PRIDE DOMAIN  Granted Power: Whenever you roll a 1 on a saving throw, you can immediately reroll the save. You must keep the result of the second roll, even if it is another 1.  Pride Domain Spells  1 Hypnotism: Fascinates 2d4 HD of creatures. 2 Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 Cha for 1 minute/level. 3 Heroism: Gives +2 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Str, and 1 hp/ level. 5 Reduce Person, Mass: Reduces several creatures.  6 ForbiddanceM: Blocks planar travel, damages creatures of different alignment. 7 Heroism, Greater: Gives +4 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks; immunity to fear; temporary hp. 8 Spell Immunity, Greater: As spell immunity, but up to 8th-level spells. 9 Charm Monster, Mass: As charm monster, but all within 30 ft.  Granted Power: You cast all abjuration spells at +1 caster level.  Purification Domain Spells  1 Nimbus of Light†: Sunlight illuminates you until released as an attack. 2 Deiﬁc Vengeance†: Deity’s punishment deals 1d6 damage/2 levels (max 5d6). 3 Recitation† Your allies get bonus on AC, attacks and saves. 4 Castigate†: Verbal rebuke damages those whose alignment differs from yours. 5 Dance of the Unicorn†: Purifying mist washes the air clean of smoke, dust, and poisons. 6 Fires of Purity†: Subject bursts into magical ﬂame, becoming a dangerous weapon. 7 Righteous Wrath of the Faithful†: Your allies gain extra attack, +3 on attack rolls and damage rolls. 8 Sunburst†: Blinds all within 80 ft., deals 6d6 damage. 9 Visage of the Deity, Greater†: As lesser visage of the deity, but you become half-celestial or half-ﬁendish.  RENEWAL DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): If you fall below 0 hit points, you regain a number of hit points equal to 1d8 + your Charisma modiﬁer. This ability functions once per day. If an attack brings you to –10 hit points or lower, you die before this power takes effect.  Renewal Domain Spells  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. 2 Restoration, Lesser: Dispels magical ability penalty or repairs 1d4 ability damage. 3 Remove Disease: Cures all diseases affecting subject. 4 Reincarnate: Brings dead subject back to life in random body. 5 AtonementFX: Removes burden of misdeeds from subject. 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. 7 Restoration, GreaterX: As restoration, plus restores all levels and ability scores. 8 Polymorph Any Object: Changes any subject into anything else. 9 Freedom: Releases creature from imprisonment.  RETRIBUTION DOMAIN  Granted Power (Su): Once per day, if you have been harmed by someone in combat, you can make a strike of vengeance with a melee or ranged weapon against that foe on your next action. If thie strike hits, you deal maximum damage.  1 Shield of Faith: Aura grants +2 or higher deﬂection bonus. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. 3 Speak with Dead: Corpse answers one question/2 levels. 4 Fire Shield: Creatures attacking you take ﬁre damage; you’re protected from heat or cold. 5 Mark of Justice: Designates action that will trigger curse on subject. 6 Banishment: Banishes 2 HD/level of extraplanar creatures. 7 Spell Turning: Reﬂect 1d4+6 spell levels back at caster. 8 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  APPENDIX  PURIFICATION DOMAIN  Retribution Domain Spells  RUNE DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Scribe Scroll as a bonus feat.  Rune Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  Erase: Mundane or magical writing vanishes. Secret Page: Changes one page to hide its real content. Glyph of WardingM: Inscription harms those who pass it. Explosive Runes: Deals 6d6 damage when read. Planar Binding, Lesser: Traps extraplanar creature of 6 HD or less until it performs a task. Glyph of Warding, Greater: As glyph of warding, but up to 10d8 damage or 6th-level spell. Drawmij’s Instant SummonsM: Prepared object appears in your hand. Symbol of Death M: Triggered rune slays nearby creatures. Teleportation CircleM: Circle teleports any creature inside to designated spot.  SCALYKIND DOMAIN  Granted Power: Rebuke or command animals (reptilian creatures and snakes only) as an evil cleric rebukes or commands undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  Scalykind Domain Spells  1 Magic Fang: One natural weapon of subject creature gets +1 on attack rolls and damage rolls. 2 Animal Trance*: Fascinates 2d6 animals. 3 Magic Fang, Greater: One natural attack of subject creature gets +1/4 levels on attack rolls and damage rolls (max +5). 4 Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 5 Animal Growth*: One animal/2 levels doubles in size. 6 Eyebite: Subject becomes panicked, sickened, and comatose. 7 Creeping Doom**: Swarms of centipedes attack at your command. 8 Animal Shapes*: One ally/level polymorphs into chosen animal. 9 ShapechangeF: Transforms you into any creature, and change forms once per round. *Affects only ophidian and reptilian creatures. **Composed of tiny snakes.  279  SLIME DOMAIN  SPIDER DOMAIN  Slime Domain Spells  Spider Domain Spells  APPENDIX  Granted Power: Rebuke or command oozes as an evil cleric rebukes or commands undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  1 Grease: Makes 10-ft. square or one object slippery. 2 Melf’s Acid Arrow: Ranged touch attack; 2d4 damage for 1 round + 1 round/3 levels. 3 Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 4 Rusting Grasp: Your touch corrodes iron and alloys. 5 Evard’s Black Tentacles: Tentacles grapple all within 15ft. spread. 6 Transmute Rock to Mud: Transforms two 10-ft. cubes per level. 7 Destruction F: Kills subject and destroys remains. 8 Power Word Blind: Blinds creature with 200 hp or less. 9 Implosion: Kills one creature/round.  SLOTH DOMAIN  Granted Powers: You are closest to your god while lazing and relaxing. You take no penalty to Armor Class against melee attacks while prone.  Sloth Domain Spells 1 2 3 4  5 6 7 8 9  Touch of Fatigue: Touch attack fatigues subject. Unseen Servant: Invisible force obeys your commands. Deep Slumber: Puts 10 HD of creatures to sleep. Slow: One subject/level takes only one action/round, –2 to AC, –2 on attack rolls. Symbol of SleepM: Triggered rune puts nearby creatures into catatonic slumber. Waves of Fatigue: Several subjects become fatigued. Shadow Walk: Step into shadow to travel rapidly. Waves of Exhaustion: Several subjects become exhausted. Astral Projection M: Projects you and companions onto the Astral Plane.  SPELL DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain a +2 bonus on Concentration checks and Spellcraft checks.  Spell Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9  280  Mage Armor: Gives subject +4 armor bonus. Silence: Negates sound in 15-ft. radius. Anyspell†: Prepare any arcane spell up to 2nd level. Rary’s Mnemonic EnhancerF: Wizard only. Prepares extra spells or retains one just cast. Break Enchantment: Frees subjects from enchantments, alternations, curses, and petriﬁcation. Anyspell, Greater†: Prepare any arcane spell up to 5th level. Limited Wish X: Alters reality—within spell limits. Antimagic Field: Negates magic within 10 ft. Mordenkainen’s Disjunction: Dispels magic, disenchants magic items.  Granted Power: Rebuke or command spiders as an evil cleric rebukes or commands undead. You can use this ability a number of times per day equal to 3 + your Cha modiﬁer.  1 2 3 4  Spider Climb: Grants ability to walk on walls and ceilings. Summon Swarm: Summons swarm of bats, rats, or spiders. Phantom Steed*: Magic horse appears for 1 hour/level. Giant Vermin: Turns centipedes, scorpions, or spiders into giant vermin. 5 Insect Plague: Locust swarms attack creatures. 6 Spider Curse†: Turn humanoid subject into a drider. 7 Stone Spiders†: Transform pebbles into monstrous spider constructs. 8 Creeping Doom: Swarms of centipedes attack at your command. 9 Spider Shapes†: Polymorph one creature/level into monstrous spider. *Has a vermin shape.  STORM DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain resistance to electricity 5.  Storm Domain Spells  1 Entropic Shield: Ranged attacks against you have 20% miss chance. 2 Gust of Wind: Blows away or knocks down smaller creatures. 3 Call Lightning: Calls down lightning bolts (3d6 per bolt) from sky. 4 Sleet Storm: Hampers vision and movement. 5 Ice Storm: Hail deals 5d6 damage in cylinder 40 ft. across. 6 Summon Monster VI*: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. 8 Whirlwind: Cyclone deals damage and can pick up creatures. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  SUFFERING DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): You can use a pain touch once per day. Make a melee touch attack against a living creature, which bestows on that creature a –2 penalty to Strength and Dexterity for 1 minute on a successful attack. This ability does not affect creatures that have immunity to extra damage from critical hits.  Suffering Domain Spells  1 Bane: Enemies take –1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. 3 Bestow Curse: –6 to an ability score; –4 on attack rolls, saves, and checks; or 50% chance of losing each action. 4 Enervation: Subject gains 1d4 negative levels. 5 Feeblemind: Subject’s Int and Cha drop to 1. 6 Harm: Deals 10 points/level damage to subject. 7 Eyebite: Subject becomes panicked, sickened, and comatose.  8 Symbol of Pain M: Triggered rune wracks nearby creatures with pain. 9 Horrid Wilting: Deals 1d6/level damage within 30 ft.  SUMMONER DOMAIN  Granted Power: You cast all conjuration (summoning) and conjuration (calling) spells at +2 caster level.  Summoner Domain Spells  TIME DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Improved Initiative as a bonus feat.  Time Domain Spells  1 True Strike: +20 on your next attack roll. 2 Gentle Repose: Preserves one corpse. 3 Haste: One creature/level moves faster, +1 on attack rolls, AC, and Reﬂex saves. 4 Freedom of Movement: Subject moves normally despite impediments. 5 PermanencyX: Makes certain spells permanent. 6 ContingencyF: Sets trigger condition for another spell. 7 Legend LoreMF: Lets you learn tales about a person, place, or thing. 8 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger. 9 Time Stop: You act freely for 1d4+1 rounds.  TRADE DOMAIN  Granted Power (Sp): Once per day as a free action, you can use detect thoughts, affecting one subject and lasting a number of minutes equal to your Charisma bonus (minimum 1 minute).  Trade Domain Spells  1 Message: Whispered conversation at a distance. 2 Gembomb†M: Gem becomes a bomb that deals 1d8 force damage/2 levels. 3 Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 to Charisma for 1 minute/level. 4 Sending: Delivers short message anywhere, instantly. 5 Fabricate: Transforms raw material into ﬁnished items. 6 True SeeingM: Lets you see all things as they really are. 7 Mordenkainen’s Magniﬁcent Mansion F: Door leads to extradimensional mansion. 8 Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying.  TYRANNY DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add +1 to the save DC of any enchantment (compulsion) spell you cast.  Tyranny Domain Spells  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. 3 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. 4 Fear: Subjects within cone ﬂee for 1 round/level. 5 Command, Greater: As command, but affects one subject/ level. 6 Geas/Quest: As lesser geas, plus it affects any creature. 7 Bigby’s Grasping Hand: Hand provides cover, pushes, or grapples. 8 Charm Monster, Mass: As charm monster, but all within 30 ft. 9 Dominate Monster: As dominate person, but any creature.  APPENDIX  1 Summon Monster I: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 2 Summon Monster II: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 3 Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 4 Planar Ally, LesserX: Exchange services with a 6 HD extraplanar creature. 5 Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 6 Planar Ally: As lesser planar ally, but up to 16 HD. 7 Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you. 8 Planar Ally, Greater: As lesser planar ally, but up to 24 HD. 9 GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  9 Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object.  UNDEATH DOMAIN  Granted Power: You gain Extra Turning as a bonus feat.  Undeath Domain Spells  1 Detect Undead: Reveals undead within 60 ft. 2 DesecrateM: Fills area with negative energy, making undead stronger. 3 Animate Dead M: Creates undead skeletons and zombies. 4 Death Ward: Grants immunity to death spells and negative energy effects. 5 Circle of Death M: Kills 1d4/level HD of creatures. 6 Create Undead M: Creates ghouls, ghasts, mummies, or mohrgs. 7 Control Undead: Undead don’t attack you while under your command. 8 Create Greater Undead M: Create shadows, wraiths, specters, or devourers. 9 Energy Drain: Subject gains 2d4 negative levels.  WEALTH DOMAIN  Granted Power: Add Appraise to your list of cleric class skills. You gain Skill Focus (Appraise) as a bonus feat.  Wealth Domain Spells 1 2 3 4 5  6 7 8 9  Alarm: Wards an area for 2 hours/level. Obscure Object: Masks object against scrying. Glyph of WardingM: Inscription harms those who pass it. Detect Scrying: Alerts you of magical eavesdropping. Leomund’s Secret ChestF: Hides expensive chest on Ethereal Plane; you retrieve it at will. ForbiddanceM: Blocks planar travel, damages creatures of different alignment. Sequester: Subject is invisible to sight and scrying; renders creature comatose. Discern Location: Reveals exact location of creature or object. Antipathy: Object or location affected by spell repels certain creatures.  281  WINDSTORM DOMAIN  Granted Power: Inclement weather has less of an effect on you. Rain and snow don’t penalize your Spot and Search checks. You can move through snow-covered and icy terrain at your normal movement. Wind effects, whether natural or magical, affect you as if you were one size category larger.  APPENDIX  Windstorm Domain Spells  1 Obscuring Mist: Fog surrounds you. 2 Binding Winds: Air prevents subject from moving, hinders ranged attacks. 3 Call Lightning: Calls down lightning bolts (3d6 per bolt) from sky. 4 Ice Storm: Hail deals 5d6 damage in cylinder 40 ft. across. 5 Arc of Lightning†: Line of electricity arcs between two creatures (1d6/level damage). 6 Cloudwalkers†: Subjects can ﬂy outdoors at speed of 60 ft. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. 8 Whirlwind: Cyclone deals damage and can pick up creatures. 9 Whirlwind, Greater†: As whirlwind, but larger and more destructive.  WRATH DOMAIN  Granted Power: Once per day, you can subtract a number of points from your Wisdom score equal to or less than your cleric level. For every 2 points you subtract from your Wisdom score, add 1 point and add them to your Strength score. You suffer all the effects of reduced Wisdom, including access to spells and bonus spells, reduction of Will saves, and penalties on Wisdom-based skills. This trade between ability scores lasts for 1 round per cleric level and cannot be ended prematurely.  Wrath Domain Spells  1 Rhino’s Rush†: Next charge deals double damage. 2 Bull’s Strength: Subject gains +4 Str for 1 minute/level. 3 Rage: Subjects gain +2 to Str and Con, +1 on Will saves, –2 to AC. 4 Shout: Deafens all within cone and deals 5d6 sonic damage. 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases, and you gain combat bonuses. 6 Song of Discord: Forces subjects to attack each other. 7 Tenser’s Transformation M: You gain combat bonuses. 8 Shout, Greater: Devastating yell deals 10d6 sonic damage; stuns creatures, damages objects. 9 Storm of Vengeance: Storm rains acid, lightning, and hail.  PLANAR DOMAINS  282  A planar domain counts as both of a cleric’s domain choices. The granted powers of a planar domain are more potent than those of other domains, and each level offers two spells from which a cleric can choose when preparing spells. Each day, a cleric with access to a planar domain chooses one of the two spells available to prepare in his domain spell slot for each spell level. Unlike other domains, planar domains each have an alignment requirement that must be met by a cleric who wants to access the domain.  A cleric need not select a speciﬁc deity to have access to a planar domain. A cleric who devotes himself to a speciﬁc alignment (LG, NG, CG, LN, CN, LE, NE, or CE) rather than a deity can select a planar domain in place of his two normal domain choices. If the DM wishes, he can make domains speciﬁc to other planes, using these as representative guides.  ABYSS DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be chaotic evil. Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can channel the furious power of the demons. This power grants you a +4 bonus to Strength but also gives you a –2 penalty to Armor Class. The effect lasts for 5 rounds and cannot be ended prematurely. Add Intimidate to your list of cleric class skills.  Abyss Domain Spells  1 Align Weapon: Weapon becomes evil or chaotic. Cause Fear: One creature of 5 HD or fewer ﬂees for 1d4 rounds. 2 Bull’s Strength: Subject gains +4 to Strength for 1 minute/level. Death Knell: Kills dying creature; you gain 1d8 temporary hp, +2 to Strength, and +1 caster level. 3 Babau Slime†: Secrete a body-covering acid that damages foes’ weapons. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Balor Nimbus†: Subject’s ﬂaming body damages foes in grapple. Poison: Touch deals 1d10 Con damage, repeats in 1 minute. 5 Slay Living: Touch attack kills subject. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Bull’s Strength, Mass: As bull’s strength, affects one subject/level. Harm: Deals 10 points/level damage to subject. 7 Destruction F: Kills subject and destroys remains. Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Finger of Death: Kills one subject. Bodak’s Glare†: You slay a creature, which turns into a bodak 24 hours later. 9 Implosion: Kills one creature/round. Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* * Chaotic evil creatures only.  ARBOREA DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be chaotic good. Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can channel the glory of the eladrin to grant yourself a morale bonus on weapon damage rolls and saves against charm and fear effects. This bonus is equal to your Charisma bonus (if any) and lasts for 1 minute. Add Survival to your list of cleric class skills.  Arborea Domain Spells  1 Endure Elements: Exist comfortably in hot or cold environments. Longstrider: Your speed increases by 10 ft. 2 Aid: +1 on attack rolls and saves against fear, 1d8 temporary hp +1/level (max +10).  BAATOR DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be lawful evil. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to see perfectly in darkness of any kind, even that created by a deeper darkness spell. Add Bluff to your list of cleric class skills.  Baator Domain Spells  1 Bane: Enemies take –1 on attack rolls and saves against fear. Disguise Self: Changes your appearance. 2 Darkness: 20-ft. radius of supernatural shadow. Fox’s Cunning: Subject gains +4 to Intelligence for 1 minute/level. 3 Detect Thoughts: Allows “listening” to surface thoughts. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Deeper Darkness: Object sheds supernatural shadow in 60-ft. radius. Suggestion: Compels subject to follow stated course of action. 5 Spell Resistance: Subject gains SR 12 + level. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Dominate Person: Controls humanoid telepathically. Fox’s Cunning, Mass: As fox’s cunning, but affects one subject/level. 7 Repulsion: Creatures can’t approach you. Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Demand: As sending, plus you can send suggestion. Spell Turning: Reﬂect 1d4+6 spell levels back at caster. 9 Imprisonment: Entombs subject beneath the earth.  Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* * Lawful evil creatures only.  CELESTIA DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be lawful good. Granted Power (Su): Once per day as a free action, you can generate an aura of menace similar to that of the archons. The aura lasts for 1 minute. Any hostile enemy within a 20-foot radius of you must succeed on a Will save (DC 10 + 1/2 your cleric level + your Cha modiﬁer) to resist its effects. Those who fail take a –2 penalty on attack rolls, Armor Class, and saves for 24 hours or until they successfully hit you. A creature that has resisted or broken the effect cannot be affected again by your aura for 24 hours. Add Sense Motive to your list of cleric class skills.  APPENDIX  Eagle’s Splendor: Subject gains +4 to Charisma for 1 minute/level. 3 Heroism: Gives +2 on attack rolls, saves, skill checks. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Neutralize Poison: Immunizes subject against poison, detoxiﬁes venom in or on subject. Opalescent Glare†: Kill creatures with a look, or make them very afraid. 5 Break Enchantment: Frees subjects from enchantments, alternations, curses, and petriﬁcation. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Heroes’ Feast: Food for one creature/level cures and grants combat bonuses. Eagle’s Splendor, Mass: As eagle’s splendor, affects one subject/level. 7 Spell Turning: Reﬂect 1d4+6 spell levels back at caster. Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Heroism, Greater: Gives +4 bonus on attack rolls, saves, skill checks; immunity to fear; temporary hp. Mind Blank: Subject is immune to mental/emotional magic and scrying. 9 Freedom: Releases creature from imprisonment. Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you* * Chaotic good creatures only.  Celestia Domain Spells  1 Light of Lunia†: You radiate silvery light, which you can expend as two bolts that deal 1d6 damage. Shield of Faith: Aura grants +2 or higher deﬂection bonus. 2 Bear’s Endurance: Subject gains +4 to Con for 1 minute/ level. Shield OtherF: You take half of subject’s damage. 3 Magic Vestment: Armor or shield gains +1 enhancement/4 levels. Summon Monster III: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 4 Divine Power: You gain attack bonus, +6 to Strength, and 1 hp/level. Magic Weapon, Greater: +1 bonus/4 levels (max +5). 5 Righteous Might: Your size increases, and you gain combat bonuses. Summon Monster V: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 6 Blade Barrier: Wall of blades deals 1d6/level damage. Bear’s Endurance, Mass: As bear’s endurance, affects one subject/level. 7 Regenerate: Subject’s severed limbs grow back, cures 4d8 damage +1/level (max +35). Summon Monster VII: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* 8 Power Word Stun: Stuns creatures with 150 or fewer hp. Shield of LawF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against chaotic spells. 9 Foresight: “Sixth sense” warns of impending danger. Summon Monster IX: Calls extraplanar creature to ﬁght for you.* * Lawful good creatures only.  ELYSIUM DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be neutral good. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to smite evil with a single melee attack once per day. You add your Charisma bonus (if any) to your attack roll and deal an extra 1 point of damage per class level. This smite attack is treated as good-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. At 5th level and every ﬁve levels thereafter, you can use this smite attack one additional time per day.  283  APPENDIX  Elysium Domain Spells  1 Charm Person: Makes one person your friend. Protection from Evil: +2 to AC and saves, counter mind control, hedge out elementals and outsiders. 2 Enthrall: Captivates all within 100 ft. + 10 ft./level. Planar Tolerance†: Provides long-term protection against overtly damaging planar traits. 3 Magic Circle against Evil: As protection spell, but 10-ft. radius and 10 minutes/level. Mantle of Good†: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with the evil descriptor. 4 Charm Monster: Makes monster believe it is your ally. Holy Smite: Damages and blinds evil creatures. 5 Dispel Evil: +4 bonus against attacks. Cure Light Wounds, Mass: Cures 1d8 damage +1/level for many creatures. 6 Find the Path: Shows most direct way to a location. Mind Fog: Subjects in fog get –10 to Wisdom and Will checks. 7 Control Weather: Changes weather in local area. Holy Word: Kills, paralyzes, blinds, or deafens non-good subjects. 8 Holy AuraF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance and SR 25 against evil spells. Sunburst: Blinds all within 80 ft., deals 6d6 damage. 9 Heal, Mass: As heal, but with several subjects. Moment of Prescience: You gain insight bonus on single attack roll, check, or save.  HADES DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be neutral evil. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to smite good with a single melee attack once per day. You add your Charisma bonus (if any) to your attack roll and deal an extra 1 point of damage per class level. This smite attack is treated as evil-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. At 5th level and every ﬁve levels thereafter, you can use this smite attack one additional time per day.  Hades Domain Spells  1 Doom: One subject takes –2 on attacks, damage, saves, and checks. Protection from Good: +2 to AC and saves, counter mind control, hedge out elementals and outsiders. 2 Resist Planar Alignment†: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. Rebuke†: Subject is dazed 1 round, then shaken. 3 Magic Circle against Good: As protection spell, but 10-ft. radius and 10 minutes/level. Mantle of Evil†: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with the good descriptor. 4 Contagion: Infects subject with chosen disease. Unholy Blight: Damages and sickens good creatures. 5 Crushing Despair: Subjects take –2 on attack rolls, damage rolls, saves, and checks. Dispel Good: +4 bonus against attacks by good creatures. 6 Mind Fog: Subjects in fog get –10 to Wisdom and Will checks. Waves of Fatigue: Several subjects become fatigued.  284  7 Blasphemy: Kills, paralyzes, weakens, or dazes non-evil subject. Plane ShiftF: As many as eight subjects travel to another plane. 8 Unholy AuraF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against good spells. Waves of Exhaustion: Several subjects become exhausted. 9 Energy Drain: Subject gains 2d4 negative levels. GateX: Connects two planes for travel or summoning.  LIMBO DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be chaotic neutral. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to smite law with a single melee attack once per day. You add your Charisma bonus (if any) to your attack roll and deal an extra 1 point of damage per class level. This smite attack is treated as chaotic-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. At 5th level and every ﬁve levels thereafter, you can use this smite attack one additional time per day.  Limbo Domain Spells  1 Confusion, Lesser: One creature acts randomly for 1 round. Protection from Law: +2 to AC and saves, counter mind control, hedge out elementals and outsiders. 2 Entropic Shield: Ranged attacks against you have 20% miss chance. Resist Planar Alignment†: Subject can resist penalties for being of an opposed alignment on an aligned Outer Plane. 3 Magic Circle against Law: As protection spell, but 10-ft. radius and 10 minutes/level. Mantle of Chaos†: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with the lawful descriptor. 4 Chaos Hammer: Damages and slows lawful creatures. Perinarch†: Gain greater control over Limbo’s morphic essence. 5 Baleful Polymorph: Transforms subject into harmless animal. Dispel Law: +4 bonus against attacks by lawful creatures. 6 Animate Objects: Objects attack your foes. Insanity: Subject suffers continuous confusion. 7 Song of Discord: Forces subjects to attack each other. Word of Chaos: Nonchaotic subject is killed, confused, stunned, or deafened. 8 Cloak of ChaosF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against lawful spells. Otto’s Irresistible Dance: Forces subject to dance. 9 Perinarch, Planar†: Gain control over a small area of any divinely morphic plane. ShapechangeF: Transforms you into any creature, and change forms once per round.  MECHANUS DOMAIN  Requirement: Must be lawful neutral. Granted Power (Su): You gain the ability to smite chaos with a single melee attack once per day. You add your Charisma bonus (if any) to your attack roll and deal an extra 1 point of damage per class level. This smite attack is treated as lawful-aligned for the purpose of overcoming damage reduction. At 5th level and every ﬁve levels thereafter, you can use this smite attack one additional time per day.  Mechanus Domain Spells  5 Dispel Chaos: +4 bonus against attacks by chaotic creatures. Mark of Justice: Designates action that will trigger curse on subject. 6 Hold Monster: As hold person, but any creature. Wall of Gears†: Creates wall of moving gears that deals 1d6 damage/2 levels to creatures within 10 ft. 7 Dictum: Kills, paralyzes, slows, or deafens nonlawful subjects. Hold Person, Mass: As hold person, but all within 30 ft. 8 Iron Body: Your body becomes living iron. Shield of LawF: +4 to AC, +4 resistance, and SR 25 against chaotic spells. 9 Call Marut†: A marut performs one duty for you. Mordenkainen’s Disjunction: Dispels magic, disenchants magic items.  APPENDIX  1 Command: One subject obeys selected command for 1 round. Protection from Chaos: +2 to AC and saves, counter mind control, hedge out elementals and outsiders. 2 Calm Emotions: Calms creatures, negating emotion effects. Mechanus Mind†: Reformat subject’s mind to be coldly calculating. 3 Magic Circle against Chaos: As protection spell, but 10-ft. radius and 10 minutes/level. Mantle of Law†: You gain SR 12 + caster level against spells with the chaotic descriptor. 4 Discern Lies: Reveals deliberate falsehoods. Order’s Wrath: Damages and dazes chaotic creatures. SOURCES  Spell Compendium is a collection of material that previously appeared in a number of different products and other sources. Following is a list of those sources and their authors. D&D Supplements Complete Adventurer by Jesse Decker Complete Arcane by Richard Baker Complete Divine by David Noonan Complete Warrior by Andy Collins, David Noonan, and Ed Stark Draconomicon by Andy Collins, Skip Williams, and James Wyatt Libris Mortis by Andy Collins and Bruce R. Cordell Magic of Faerûn by Sean K Reynolds, Duane Maxwell, and Angel Leigh McCoy Manual of the Planes by Andy Collins, Bruce R. Cordell, and David Noonan Miniatures Handbook by Michael Donais, Skaff Elias, Rob Heinsoo, and Jonathan Tweet Planar Handbook by Bruce R. Cordell and Gwendolyn F. M. Kestrel Player’s Guide to Faerûn by Richard Baker, Travis Stout, and James Wyatt Savage Species by David Eckelberry, Rich Redman, and Jennifer Clarke Wilkes Underdark by Bruce R. Cordell, Gwendolyn F. M. Kestrel, and Jeff Quick Articles published on www.wizards.com/dnd “Barb of the Mind” by Sean K Reynolds “The Codicil of White” by Sean K Reynolds “Earthmother’s Weapons” by Sean K Reynolds “Foundations of Stone” by James Jacobs “Lesser Testament of Vraer” by Sean K Reynolds “The Lost Coast” by James Jacobs “Magic of Delight and Despair I” by Gwendolyn F. M. Kestrel “Master Tactician” by Sean K Reynolds  “Obsul Ssussun” by Sean K Reynolds “Sand and Sun” by James Jacobs “Snow and Ice” by James Jacobs “Spellbook Archive” by Ramon Arjona, Richard Baker, Andy Collins, Robert Holzmeier, and James Wyatt “Spells of the Deep Underdark” by James Jacobs “Spells of the Ruins” by James Jacobs “Tar’Ael Veluuthra” by Sean K Reynolds “Toxic Paradise” by James Jacobs Articles published in Dragon Magazine “Rays of Light” by Stephen Schubert, Annual #5 “Alister’s Augmentations” by Owen K.C. Stephens, #275 “Abuse Your Illusions” by Rich Redman, #291 “Rune-Skulls of the Abbor-Alz” by James Jacobs, #292 “Blessings of War” by Amber E. Scott, #299 “A Clutch of Cantrips” by Kieran Turley and S. Deniz Bucak, #302 “Prayers of the Frostmaiden: The Spells of Auril” by Thomas M. Costa, #312 “Elder Serpents of Set” by Thomas M. Costa, #313 “Brotherhood of the Burning Heart” by Clifford Horowitz, #314 “Dust to Dust” by Ari Marmell, #314 “Guardians of the Deepest Seas” by James Jacobs, #314 “Masters of the Four Winds” by David Noonan, #314 “The Bloody Swords” by Sean K Reynolds, #315 “Sin Eaters of Eilistraee” by James Jacobs, #315 “Holy Strategists of the Red Knight” by Travis Stout, #317 “Children of Ka” by Ken Marable, #318 “Under Command: Forms of Legend” by Jesse Decker, #320 “Patterns of Shadow and Light” by Jason Nelson, #322 “Force Spells” by C. Wesley Clough, #323 “Seven Deadly Domains” by Hal Maclean, #323 “The Hidden Book” by Rich Burlew, #324 “Myths of the Shadow” by Rahul Kanakia, #325 “Tvash-Prull’s Symphony” by James Jacobs, #328 285  